[]

[]

Theodore Sturgeon (circa 1960)

[]

eISBN: 978-1-58394-749-4

Copyright © 1998 by the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Previously
published materials copyright © 1948, 1949, 1953 by Theodore Sturgeon
and the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Foreword copyright © 1998 by
Larry McCaffery. All rights reserved. No portion of this book, except
for brief review, may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise—without the written permission of
the publisher. For information contact North Atlantic Books.

Published by
North Atlantic Books
P.O. Box 12327
Berkeley, California 94712

Cover art by Michael Dashow
Cover design by Paula Morrison

_The Perfect Host_ is sponsored by the Society for the Study of Native
Arts and Sciences, a nonprofit educational corporation whose goals are
to develop an educational and cross-cultural perspective linking various
scientific, social, and artistic fields; to nurture a holistic view of
arts, sciences, humanities, and healing; and to publish and distribute
literature on the relationship of mind, body, and nature.

North Atlantic Books’ publications are available through most
bookstores. For further information, visit our website at
www.northatlanticbooks.com or call 800-733-3000.

The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:

Sturgeon, Theodore
   The perfect host / Theodore Sturgeon : edited by Paul Williams :
foreword by Larry McCaffery.
      p. cm. — (The complete stories of Theodore Sturgeon. v. 5)
   1. Fantastic fiction, American. 2. Science fiction,
American. I. Williams, Paul, 1948–. II. Title. III. Series: Sturgeon,
Theodore. Short stories : v. 5.
PS3569.T875A6 1998  vol. 5
8​1​3′.5​4—d​c​21                                                                      98-20023

v3.1



EDITOR’S NOTE


THEODORE HAMILTON STURGEON was born February 26, 1918, and died May 8,
1985. This is the fifth of a series of volumes that will collect all of
his short fiction of all types and all lengths shorter than a novel. The
volumes and the stories within the volumes are organized chronologically
by order of composition (insofar as it can be determined). This fifth
volume contains stories written between late 1947 and early 1949. Two
are being published here for the first time; and five others have never
before appeared in a Sturgeon collection.

Preparation of each of these volumes would not be possible without the
hard work and invaluable participation of Noël Sturgeon, Debbie Notkin,
and our publishers, Lindy Hough and Richard Grossinger. I would also
like to thank, for their significant assistance with this volume, Larry
McCaffery, the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust, Marion Sturgeon, Jayne
Williams, Dorothe Tunstall, Ralph Vicinanza, Dixon Chandler, Gordon
Benson, Jr. and Phil Stephensen-Payne, Judith Merril, Tom Whitmore,
William F Seabrook, Paula Morrison, Catherine Campaigne, T. V. Reed,
Cindy Lee Berryhill, The Other Change of Hobbit Bookstore and all of you
who have expressed your interest and support.



BOOKS BY THEODORE STURGEON


_Without Sorcery_ (1948)

_The Dreaming Jewels_ [aka _The Synthetic Man_] (1950)

_More Than Human_ (1953)

_E Pluribus Unicorn_ (1953)

_Caviar_ (1955)

_A Way Home_ (1955)

_The King and Four Queens_ (1956)

_I, Libertine_ (1956)

_A Touch of Strange_ (1958)

_The Cosmic Rape_ [aka _To_ _Marry_ Medusa] (1958)

_Aliens 4_ (1959)

_Venus Plus X_ (1960)

_Beyond_ (1960)

_Some of Your Blood_ (1961)

_Voyage to the Bottom of the_ _Sea_ (1961)

_The Player on the Other Side_ (1963)

_Sturgeon in Orbit_ (1964)

_Starshine_ (1966)

_The Rare Breed_ (1966)

_Sturgeon Is Alive and Well …_ (1971)

_The Worlds of Theodore_ _Sturgeon_ (1972)

_Sturgeon’s West_ (with Don Ward) (1973)

_Case and the Dreamer_ (1974)

_Visions and Venturers_ (1978)

_Maturity_ (1979)

_The Stars Are the Styx_ (1979)

_The Golden Helix_ (1979)

_Alien Cargo_ (1984)

_Godbody_ (1986)

_A Touch of Sturgeon_ (1987)

_The [Widget], the [Wadget]_, _and Boff_ (1989)

_Argyll_ (1993)

_Star Trek, The Joy Machine_ (with James Gunn) (1996)



THE COMPLETE STORIES SERIES


1. _The Ultimate Egoist_ (1994)

2. _Microcosmic God_ (1995)

3. _Killdozer!_ (1996)

4. _Thunder and Roses_ (1997)

5. _The Perfect Host_ (1998)

6. _Baby Is Three_ (1999)

7. _A Saucer of Loneliness_ (2000)

8. _Bright Segment_ (2002)

9. _And Now the News …_ (2003)

10. _The Man Who Lost the Sea_ (2005)

11. _The Nail and the Oracle_ (2007)

12. _Slow Sculpture_ (2009)

13. _Case and the Dreamer_ 2010)



CONTENTS


_Cover_

_About the Author_

_Title Page_

_Copyright_

_Editor’s Note_

_Other Books by This Author_

Foreword by Larry McCaffery

Quietly

The Music

Unite and Conquer

The Love of Heaven

Till Death Do Us Join

The Perfect Host

The Martian and the Moron

Die, Maestro, Die!

The Dark Goddess

Scars

Messenger

Minority Report

Prodigy

Farewell to Eden

One Foot and the Grave

What Dead Men Tell

The Hurkle Is a Happy Beast

Story Notes by Paul Williams



FOREWORD



BY LARRY MCCAFFERY


I. Preliminary Remarks

“And now, though the idea behind the [Normalcy] program was still the
same … a new idea was gaining weight daily—to examine Irregulars always
more meticulously, with a view, perhaps to letting one live—one which
might benefit all of humanity by his very difference; one who might be a
genius, a great artist in some field.… It was the thin end of the wedge
for Homo superior, who would, by definition, be an Irregular.”

—Theodore Sturgeon, “Prodigy” (1948)

INNOVATIVE ART THAT really matters—_Citizen Kane, Waiting for Godot_,
the music of Charlie Parker, John Cage, Bob Dylan and Jimi Hendrix,
Pynchon’s _V._, the short fictions of Borges, the collaborations of
Brecht and Weil, “The Waste Land,” Picasso’s _Guernica_, or the works of
Warhol and Pollock—always manages to alter fundamentally our notions of
what a given genre can do. One of the subsets of innovation that is
especially attuned to postmodernism’s spirit of intertextuality,
collaboration, and the dismantling of distinctions between high art and
popular culture has been the exploration by “serious” artists of
commercial genres. These sorts of artistic leaps often have an
especially broad impact precisely because the artist is working with,
and extending, codes, themes and motifs that a mass audience is already
familiar with. When an artist confounds our expectations by exploring
and extending the boundaries of a popular genre—the way Dylan did with
folk music in his pre-electric albums, and as Sturgeon does with a
variety of genres throughout this volume—the reverberations seem larger
and more intimate simply because more people are in touch with (and
hence can appreciate) the nature of the transformations involved.

II. A Saucer of Loneliness

Don’t talk to me about the Fifties if all you’re going to say are the
predictable clichés about Eisenhower, prosperity, conservatism and
drive-in movies. There was a lot more going on back then than tail fins,
ICBMs, and McCarthyism. Like Ted Sturgeon.

The first time I encountered a work by Theodore Sturgeon was sometime in
1957. I was an eleven-year-old kid growing up in what seems, in
retrospect, almost a parody of an alienating environment: living with
two alcoholic parents in a hyper-repressive military community on
Okinawa. And as with a lot of other alienated kids from that era,
science fiction—together with rock ‘n’ roll—provided me with some of my
first intimations about the existence of another, alternative world that
was totally alien from the limited, limiting world I was living in, and
yet utterly exhilarating, exotic, and alive. It was a world in which
Robert Sheckley and Elvis Presley, Chuck Berry and Philip K. Dick, Jerry
Lee Lewis and Ray Bradbury, Theodore Sturgeon and Little Richard were
all equally important.

The writer who was most responsible for creating a bridge between me and
that other, more sensuous, more exciting world of open-ended
possibilities was Theodore Sturgeon. My introduction to Sturgeon’s work
wasn’t through the usual sf magazines or books but through a chance
conjunction of a radio and a tape recorder—a couple of those
technological devices that were already transforming my world into
something that FELT like the sf worlds I was just then reading about for
the first time.¹ Of course, a lot of kids in those days had radios, but
it was the tape recorder I had won one Saturday night at the Harbor View
bingo game that really changed my life. This may not seem like much in
today’s age, where there’s a Blockbuster Video store on every
streetcorner and in which mechanical reproductions of all sorts are as
commonplace as the common cold, but for an eleven-year-old kid to
personally own a tape recorder in 1957 was a very big deal indeed. For
one thing, having a tape recorder meant that I was now freed from having
to save up enough money to purchase the latest tunes by Pat Boone, Chuck
Berry, Jerry Lee Lewis, the Everly Brothers and Coasters, Patti Page,
Dean Martin, Stan Freberg, and, above all, Elvis Presley. Elvis was
especially important because my dad disapproved of Elvis so much that my
playing “Heartbreak Hotel” on the living room’s hi-fi set would
frequently result in him taking me to the barber shop, where I would be
relieved of all that unruly excess hair I kept trying (unsuccessfully)
to coax into something resembling Elvis’s magnificent ducktail.

The only thing more important to me in those days than being sure I had
my tape recorder rolling on Saturday morning for the Top 50 radio
broadcast was the ritual I observed each Thursday evening when I would
slip under the covers with my radio to listen to (and record) the weekly
science fiction broadcast _X Minus One_. And the first show I ever
taped—one I would listen to again and again over the next few years—was
“A Saucer of Loneliness” by Theodore Sturgeon.

What struck me then was how different that story seemed from all the
others I was reading and listening to. Here was a story that was
undeniably sf, but without any of the gadgets or alien invasions or
technological extrapolations or other plot devices from that era. In
today’s terms, the story might be categorized as “psychological sf,” but
what seems most obvious is that the story is pure Sturgeon, a _love
story_ warmly and lyrically presented, subtly nuanced in its depiction
of two people struggling to connect with other beings. Undeniably
science fiction, it was also obviously a story that used its sf motifs
as a means of metaphorizing a universal human condition.

III. The Professor’s Teddy Bear

Twenty three years later, I finally met the man responsible for “A
Saucer of Loneliness.” Like other literary critics who wind up teaching
and writing about science fiction, I had drifted away from the field in
my late teens, and only rediscovered it when I decided in middle age to
prepare a course (at San Diego State University) in contemporary science
fiction. I encountered a number of pleasant surprises while doing
background reading for this course, but nothing really prepared me for
the shock and amazement I felt when I opened _More than Human_ and read
the first page. Not only did that opening passage remind me of a
different passage—the opening to Benjy’s section in Faulkner’s _The
Sound and the Fury_²—which had once jolted me out of my plans to pursue
a career as a lawyer, but it immediately placed me back in contact with
the Sturgeon stories that had so enthralled me as a young boy.

A few months later, when I discovered Sturgeon was living in San Diego,
I gave him a call to see if I could entice him into visiting my class,
even though I could only offer him a Mexican lunch by way of payment.
Ted agreed, and in just a few weeks I was guiding Theodore Sturgeon—who
in 1980 looked very much like an impish hippie, with a ponytail and
bell-bottoms—to the front of a large lecture hall to answer questions
from an overflow crowd of students. The q&a session that followed was
one of the most memorable I’ve ever seen or heard. Ted quickly took
control of the discussion and directed it to boldly go to realms where
none of these kids had ever gone before. Mixing stories about his
background and influences together with more specific anecdotes about
the writing of _More than Human_ that clarified some of the book’s
treatment of para-psychological union, Sturgeon was soon bringing to
life a whole slew of issues concerning mankind’s long-term potential,
communication, music, sexual identity and so on. The real highlight of
the class was an exchange between Ted and a gorgeous 20-year-old
red-headed co-ed who somewhat timidly asked Sturgeon if he felt that
_More than Human_’s notion of _homo gestalt_ anticipated the experiments
from the 1960s with communes, sexual experimentation, and so on. I’m not
sure about the rest of the class, but I was certainly blown away when
Ted proceeded to use this occasion to launch into an extended
discussion, vividly illustrated by his own experiences, about marriage,
jealousy, group sex, homosexuality, and his personal efforts at
determining the ideal number of participants in a committed sexual
relationship. My only regret about that afternoon is that I can’t
remember what that number was.

IV. _The Perfect Host:_ Ted Sturgeon’s _Sun Sessions_

_The Perfect Host_—the fifth installment in this grandly ambitious
_Complete Stories of Theodore Sturgeon_ series—is a revelation, a gift
to be treasured, a mind-blower, a time machine, a stick of literary
dynamite, an eye-opener. Or, to borrow an analogy from Sturgeon’s own
favorite resource of simile (music), it can probably best be compared to
one of the more impressive of the recent “boxed set” compilations on
compact disc. Like, say, _The Capitol Years: The Best of Frank Sinatra_,
or _Charlie Parker: The Complete Savoy Sessions, The Perfect Host_
provides enough of a representative sampling of Sturgeon’s “greatest
hits” (e.g., such classic Golden [Age] Oldies as “Unite and Conquer,”
“Prodigy,” and the volume’s title story) to give the uninitiated a good
sense of what all the fuss was about way back when. And at the same time
it offers a generous selection of alternate takes, rarities (notably
several of Sturgeon’s best forays into other forms of genre writing,
such as his wonderfully-rendered cowpoke yarn “Scars” and his
jazz-drenched tour de force crime story, “Die, Maestro, Die!”³), and
previously unreleased cuts (including one of the volume’s major finds,
“Quietly,” which appears to be an early warm-up for _More than
Human_)—which altogether offer even the most knowledgeable Sturgeon fan
the chance to gain a more complete picture of the author’s influences
and range, and an awareness of patterns of connection and influence that
were not so evident in the stories’ original formats (magazines,
anthologies, radio dramatizations). Add to this Paul Williams’s
informative “liner notes,” and some nifty new packaging, and it becomes
obvious (to me) that _The Perfect Host_ deserves to be considered one of
the major literary events of the year. Actually, given the
transformative impact that the stories from this period of Sturgeon’s
career had on the science fiction and fantasy genres, a more accurate
comparison would be to boxed sets focused on Elvis Presley’s _Sun
Sessions_ or Bob Dylan’s _Highway 61 Revisited_.

V. Stranger in a Strange Land

As was the case with Presley’s and Dylan’s arrivals on the pop music
scenes in their respective eras, it is difficult today to appreciate
just how truly out of place—how truly “Irregular”—this totally coolcat
Sturgeon dude must have seemed while he was bebopping his way onto the
center stage of the commercial sf and fantasy scenes during the late
1940s. It must have been a little as if this long-haired Italian painter
named Michaelangelo had showed up as one of the illustrators for Disney
back in the ’30s. Indeed, Sturgeon’s anti-intellectualism and mysticism,
his fascination with sexual desire and other ecstatic states of human
consciousness, his abhorrence for conformity (and frequent suggestion
that science was not only potentially dangerous but one of the principal
agents of conformity), his experiments with language and metaphor as a
means of depicting the inner, irrational lives of characters, and his
love of jazz—all these features indicate that the authors from this era
with whom Sturgeon shared the deepest affinities were not genre writers
of any sort but the Beats.

Of course, by the time Sturgeon was writing the stories included in this
volume he was already recognized as one of the leading luminaries of
science fiction’s “Golden Age,” a community of writers and a body of
work that John Campbell had helped nurture as an influential magazine
editor since 1937. But “Golden Age” or not, it’s important to recall
that this was still a fairly conservative commercial genre that Sturgeon
was trying to earn his livelihood in in the late ’40s. Yes, there were
plenty of other talented writers around who found themselves forced to
earn a living with the clichés and formula-methods of genre sf. And
talented artists nearly always find ways to loosen the corset of genre
expectations to give themselves enough room to move around in,
personally and artistically, so that they can produce genre works that
seem to them fresh and original.

On the other hand, as _The Perfect Host_ demonstrates, truly _great_
writers like Theodore Sturgeon are rarely content with merely loosening
these restrictive norms; what they are often after are much more
thoroughgoing reconfigurations that will permit them to break on through
to an entirely new textual space—an alternate genre world where they can
set themselves and their readers down and begin exploring what they
_really_ want to write about. In this regard, one thinks of the way
Dashiell Hammett recast the elements of the classical detective novel
back in the late ’20s to accommodate new themes and character types
which contrasted starkly with those that had previously been central to
the genre. The end result was the “Hard-boiled” novel, which portrayed a
world in which chaos, mystery and depravity were no longer isolatable
elements that could be identified, contained and eliminated via the
careful application of ratiocination and logic but far more active
agents permeating not merely all aspects of society, but the nature of
truth and perception.

Interestingly enough, classic detective fiction shares a number of key
assumptions with the science fiction field during the period when
Sturgeon was writing the stories that appear in _The Perfect Host_. The
most important commonality between these two genres was a faith in the
power of men’s minds, disciplined by logic and scientific method, to
solve nature’s riddles—and a consequent emphasis on characters and plot
lines which embodied this faith. These norms—which had been originally
championed by Campbell and had replaced the genre paradigms that had
governed science fiction during the rise of the pulps in the 1930s—had
helped channel the limitations of sf authors, enabling them to sacrifice
a certain amount of wild imagining in order to attain a much greater
degree of credibility and conviction in their work. The end result was
sf which was more thoughtful and credible, which had better speculative
development, and which was more effective as literature as well.

VI. More than Non-Human: Sturgeon Breaks on Through

However, even such undeniable advances within genre sf had a downside,
especially for an author like Sturgeon, who was obviously unsuited by
temperament to approach the craft of writing from any position requiring
him to sacrifice _anything_, least of all wild imagination. Certainly
the stories in _The Perfect Host_ make it clear that Sturgeon had little
interest in depicting the usual sort of science fiction characters
(courageous, bold, self-restrained, dedicated to applying technology for
the betterment of mankind).⁴ or plot lines. These stories make it
equally clear that by now Sturgeon had found a way to present some very
radical topics indeed. These include a greater attention to semiology,
philosophy, psychology and sexual desire, and a related set of concerns
that would later be explored in his greatest work, _More than Human_,
the postulated existence of being without ego, of a movement across the
borders of a unified self, and of displacement of physical fusion onto a
mental plane.

A different way to put this is that what one finds throughout these
stories is a writer grappling mightily with a means of _humanizing_
science fiction, often via the incorporation of stylistic features new
to genre writing. Examples of Sturgeon’s innovative approach to form
here include his use of multiple points of view and the
story-within-a-story device, stream of consciousness, poetic
discontinuities and other methods of conveying the movement of the mind,
and a whole host of metafictional devices.

Related to these metafictional impulses is a general foregrounding of
authorial self-consciousness that wouldn’t be common in sf until the
late-Sixties “New Wave” work of Delany, LeGuin and others. While many of
these stories are about “love” in the most obvious, romantic sense, it
is equally apparent that nearly all of them are about Sturgeon’s own
love affair with language. Sturgeon was probably the first American sf
author to bring language to the foreground of his work, not merely in
the sense of unfolding his narratives within prose mannerisms that are
lyrical and rely on assonance, alliteration and other poetic devices,
but also in the sense of providing an ongoing (frequently hilarious)
commentary on the limits of language even as they offer themselves as
new possibilities of how words can function. This sort of reflexiveness
and inquiry into the role of language and of the artist appears in a
surprisingly large number of these selections.⁵ Many of them describe
individuals who are seeking a form of union and connection that will
also preserve their individuality and sense of freedom. These questions,
meanwhile, are frequently analogous to those of Sturgeon himself. Can
he, the stories seem to be asking, find a stylistic and semiotic freedom
that is not simply a meaningless cliché or incoherence? Can he find a
form that will not trap him inside existing genre norms?⁶ Can he
construct a verbal, textual space where he will be free to examine those
philosophical and psychological issues that prior sf (or crime, or
fantasy, or western) spaces simply could not express?

One of the most obvious indications of Sturgeon’s impulse to construct a
verbal space that mediates between social space and the private, inner
space of the story proper is the manner in which he chooses to
constantly draw attention to his own linguistic performance. Consider
the following passage, which appears near the outset of “The Hurkle Is a
Happy Beast”:

“Lirht is either in a different universal plane or in another island
galaxy. Perhaps these terms mean the same thing.… Now, on Lirht, in its
greatest city, there was trouble, the nature of which does not matter to
us, and a gwik named Hvov, whom you may immediately forget, blew up a
building which was important for reasons we cannot understand … So on
Lirht, while the decisions on the fate of the miserable Hvov were being
formulated, gwik still fardled, funted, and fupped. The great central
hewton still beat out its mighty pulse, and in the anams the corsons
grew …”

This sort of playful, reflexive commentary is one of the many ways that
Sturgeon demonstrates his resistance to, and liberation from, the
conventions concerning how one should use words to present reality. This
sort of foregrounding is reinforced by a more general self-consciousness
about the strange and problematic relationship between words and
things—and the problematical position of human beings, who participate
in both⁷. The end result is that throughout nearly all the selections in
_The Perfect Host_ readers are compelled to submit to the turbulence, or
share in the delight, of Sturgeon’s mind working itself out in visibly
verbal performances.

The obvious analogy would be jazz.

VII. CODA:

Literary Critic Announces Refutation to Sturgeon’s Law

Borrego Springs, California. At a press conference today, postmodernist
expert and cyberpunk promoter, Dr. Larry McCaffery announced results of
recent tests he has been conducting to determine the accuracy of
“Sturgeon’s Law.” First proposed by the late science fiction author
Theodore Sturgeon in the mid-1950s, Sturgeon’s Law essentially states,
“Of course 90 percent of science fiction is crap, 90 percent of
_everything_ is crap.” According to McCaffery, however, his own literary
research indicates that while Sturgeon’s Law is valid in the great
majority of cases, there are important exceptions—specifically,
Sturgeon’s own stories. “After careful analysis of some 17 stories
written by Sturgeon himself and collected into _The Perfect Host: Volume
Five of the Complete Stories of Theodore Sturgeon_, I’m forced to
conclude that Sturgeon’s Law simply doesn’t apply to Sturgeon’s own
stories.” When pressed, McCaffery added that readers and critics could
continue to apply Sturgeon’s Law in the great majority of cases:
“Careful measurements taken on a control group of non-Sturgeon stories
consistently produced “crap-percentages” that were consistently in the
93 to 97 percent range; however, this percentage dropped drastically
when applied to Sturgeon’s own stories.

Asked if he could explain the remarkable disparity in crap-percentages,
McCaffery cited a number of possible factors that might have contributed
to his findings: “Empathy is undoubtedly one of the main factors. If you
look at the main characters in the 17 stories I conducted my readings
on, you’ll find that, first of all, they’re a marvelously motley crowd:
you’ve got your usual sf types—scientists, military figures, and so
on—but you’ve also got cowpokes, outcasts, musicians, murderers,
misfits, kids, old people, idiots, geniuses, heroes, villains, and
several different kinds of aliens. And yet somehow Sturgeon seemed to be
able to empathize with them all, even with truly repellent figures like
Fluke, the hipster jazz musician and murderer in ‘Die, Maestro, Die!’ ”

Asked if the empathy factor might not be related to the well-known theme
of ‘Love’ which Sturgeon himself had posited as being one of the
commonalities present in all his stories, McCaffery agreed, but hastened
to add, “There’s no question that ‘love’ is one of the building blocks
in all Sturgeon stories, but there’s so many different kinds of love—so
many “isotopes,” as it were—that just noting its presence in his work
doesn’t really tell you much. It’s like saying that carbon is one of the
common features of human beings—that’s true, but unless you know
something about what that carbon is _combined with_, you aren’t going to
really know much about any given person. For instance, in the case of
these particular 17 stories, my research was able to identify several
different kinds of love—parental love (“Quietly,” “Prodigy”), romantic
love (for example, “The Martian and the Moron,” “One Foot and the Grave”
and “The Dark Goddess”), and of course sexual love (in “Scars,” “The
Music,” “Till Death Do Us Join” and “Die, Maestro, Die!”). You could
also say that Sturgeon ‘loves’ all his characters in the sense that he
cares enough about them to produce some understanding of them—whereas in
most crappy genre writing, the authors don’t really (if you’ll pardon
the expression) _give a shit_ about their characters, especially the bad
guys. This doesn’t mean he forgives them or sympathizes with them—just
that he empathizes with them.”

McCaffery also noted that Sturgeon’s well-known stylistic virtuosity
undoubtedly contriburted to the low level of crap detected in the
stories he analyzed. “One of the things that my readings of these
stories confirmed is that Sturgeon’s stories nearly always exhibited a
far greater attention to language—assonance, alliteration and other
features of sound, patterns of symbol and metaphor, and so forth—than do
the works in the control group.”

By way of conclusion, McCaffery noted, “There’s a lot of other tests
that need to be done, and there will no doubt be other experiments that
will contradict these findings. That’s okay. Ted Sturgeon himself would
have welcomed these sorts of contradictions and controversy. He always
liked to keep things stirred up.”

      Larry McCaffery

      April 1998

Foreword Notes

1. Sturgeon reminds us of how truly mind-altering radios seemed earlier
in this century in several stories in _The Perfect Host_—most notably
“The Martian and the Moron.”

2. “ ‘And Faulkner—have you read any of Faulkner?’ ”—“The Martian and
the Moron.” Surely other readers and critics have noted the likely
influence of Faulkner on Sturgeon’s writing?

3. For what it’s worth: in the humble opinion of the author of this
Foreword, “Scars” and “Die, Maestro, Die!” are the two finest stories
included in _The Perfect Host_.

4. To the contrary, Sturgeon’s choice of characters in this volume’s
stories tends to run towards madmen, misfits, freaks, murderers, and
other similar “abnormal” figures.

5. “The Martian and the Moron,” “Unite and Conquer,” “The Hurkle Is a
Happy Beast,” “Die, Maestro Die!”, “The Perfect Host,” “The Love of
Heaven” and “Prodigy” are all stories that, at least on one level, can
be read as allegories of the artist generally, and of the sf writer in
particular.

6. “This sort of thing is strictly against the rules.”—“The Perfect
Host”

7. Cf.: “It isn’t easy to to tell what happened next.” from “One Foot
and the Grave”; “It’s sort of hard to describe.” from Hulon, in “What
Dead Men Tell”; “Damnit, it’s hard to find words that make sense!” from
“One Foot and the Grave”; “Please don’t translate. It couldn’t be
phrased as well in English.” from “The Martian and the Moron”; “There is
no word for it.” from “The Perfect Host.”



QUIETLY


SHE WAS BORN in a house near a very old town, quietly. Her father was
turning the pages of very old books, and thinking strange thoughts in
the gloom of his study. Her mother lay silent and suffering, two flights
above him. Her father was lost in his studies, but waiting for some
sign, some faint sound of the borning. Her mother lay still by the light
of a candle. The peak of her suffering came to her swiftly. Her eyes
puckered deep, and they looked like the mouths of the burrows of animals
scarring the face of a white limestone cliff. She stiffened, and,
crushing the pillow beneath the taut arch of her nape, she bit her thin
lips and she buried her nails in her palms. The breath whistled out of
her delicate, quivering nostrils; and then she decided to draw no more,
and in silence she trembled and died.

“You’re a fool,” said the doctor.

“Do your work,” snapped the child’s father.

The doctor went on with his work amongst the clutter and clabber of
childbirth. The windows at dawn were at last showing lighter than their
frames, but the light did not challenge the doctor’s lamp. Rolled up and
tumbled away, the bedclothes strayed off on the floor, full of hollows
and shadows. Rolled away, useless and spent and inert, the body of the
mother lay out of the lamplight, graying with the growing dawn.

The doctor, his supple hands saving the child, said, “My work is to heal
and to cure, and to right what I can of the bungling of fools. But it is
also to fight fools’ work by speaking my mind. Why didn’t you call me
days ago? Why didn’t you send her to the hospital?”

“She wouldn’t have gone,” said the father starkly.

The doctor glanced up at him. The father was flat, wide, tall, with a
nose like an eave and sea-going eyes. “_You_ couldn’t have taken her?
You could carry off six like her under your arm.”

“She wouldn’t have gone,” repeated the father. “She’d have died.”

“She did,” said the doctor bluntly.

“Then she was bound to. I had her for a day or so more. In that time,
with all she fought, she did not have to fight me as well.”

The doctor wrapped up the child and put it in the waiting basket. “You
loved her, didn’t you?”

“That is not a doctor’s question. Have you written out the things to be
done and what the child will eat?”

“Yes.”

“And the certificate for her?” He motioned toward the corpse. “And
whatever papers are necessary for the child?”

“All those.”

“You are paid.”

“Too well, in money.”

“Good. Now go. Do not come back here for anything, ever.”

The doctor moved to a basin and washed his hands. “You’ll send for me if
I’m needed? Children sicken, you know.”

“This one won’t. I am not accustomed to failure and there will be none
of it in my house. The child will not sicken.”

The doctor packed his instruments, glanced around the room, and walked
out. The father followed him to the door with that in his bearing which
ensured the departure and was not polite. At the door the doctor turned
suddenly, to stare up into the long controlled face, to look blatantly
at the signs in it of the naked grief that was about to break there.
“Have you no friends, man?”

“Friends!” spat the father. “There are friends about me as there is
disease about you. No sickness will get the better of you if it is
within your power. No friend will eat, and suck, and weaken me. Go back
to your ingrown nails and your physics and your death-watches, and leave
me to myself.”

The doctor shrugged and left, blowing what seemed to be a taint out of
his nostrils.

She was born quietly, and quietly she passed her childhood. Her father,
when he thought about her silence in other terms than appreciation,
thought her a mute. When she showed she was not, he felt no surprise.

The house was large and as alone as its master. The rooms and the stairs
and the wide hallways were carpeted, wall to wall, with heavy gray rugs.
The house was old and solid, its timbers pegged, its paneling and
joinery screwed and glued and immovable. Inside the brassbound oaken
slab of a door, a cushioned vestibule held a rack for shoes. Barefoot he
glided about the house, and barefoot his daughter toddled until, early
indeed, she learned his soundless stride.

He named her—Quietly. Quietly she grew.

She was not beautiful—not if mannequins and calendar girls are
beautiful. Her face was her father’s, but softened with womanliness and
with something else. Her nose was his, but rounded. She had his
far-horizoned gray eyes, but wide and wide-set. Her jaw was strong and
planar, yet only a part of the clean complex curve of shoulder, neck and
cheek. Her hair fell to her waist and was the color of black-iron heated
until it just begins to glow its deepest red.

He taught her strangely. He brought her, in his teaching, not only the
contents of his library, but the quintessence of his own astonishing
experience. All that he said was simple—simple and quiet. He explained
that often, saying,

“What is basic is simple. Complicated things are not basic, and are not
important.”

So everything she learned was simple. She learned about earning—that
things could be had without being earned, but that without being earned,
they could not be kept. She learned about fear—that it’s not a shameful
thing, nor a foolish one, since it is the essence of self-preservation;
but that he who truly hides his fear is accepted as superior. She
learned about giving—that to give is to get, but that to give too much
is to take and to lose. She learned to define evil: that which is
extreme. She learned to define good: that which is moderate. She
learned, above all, to be alone. She learned to accept aloneness at any
time—halfway through a meal, or on waking, or even in the midst of a
lesson, for her father would sometimes leave a sentence unfinished and
step out of the room, to be gone, sometimes, for days. There were
occasions when there was no food in the house, or when there was food
hidden. In these cases, she did without, or she went into the woods and
made snares and caught small animals or collected berries and wild
birds’ eggs. The one inexcusable offense was to sit frightened and bleat
her father’s name. That happened once, and all her life she bore the
scar of it, for he shouted at her. Her conditioning made her immune to
the one thing that had taken her father by surprise—the dreadful fact
that aloneness can come to any human being, without warning or justice.

“If you ever leave me,” he said once, “you must find your own way.”

“Why would I ever leave you?”

“Because you must. You will. For a year.”

“You sometimes speak as if you knew the future, Father.”

“I do,” he responded immediately. “I do because I make my own.”

“I’ll never leave you,” she said positively, and he smiled.

She hunted, but only to eat. She loved flowers, but never cut one. She
ran and climbed, and in the warm days would leave the house naked and
leap through the meadows to the woods which began at the top of the
hill. She followed secret glades and deer-runs known only to her, to a
secret pool, cold in the shade, but with its margins all but steaming at
the end of three midday hours, when the sun vaulted over it on a thick
pillar of light.

One August evening, after swimming and drying her clean brown body in
the sun, she returned to the house by the orchard path, stopping for a
while by her rabbit-hutches. When the lengthening shadows reminded her
of the hour, and her healthy young appetite gave a sudden and hearty
seconding, she skipped to the kitchen door.

It was locked.

She paused, a small frown flickering between her wide-set eyes, then
shrugged. Small and unexpected changes in her environment were part of
her father’s way. “Nothing is ‘always,’ Quietly,” he had often said.
“Look, child. The spoon is in the drawer. It is there today. It was
there yesterday and last year. So by all means say ‘The spoon is in the
drawer.’ But when you say ‘the spoon is _always_ in the drawer,’ you are
saying, partly, ‘The spoon will be in the drawer tomorrow.’ You can’t
know that!”

The kitchen door had always been unlocked until now … She shrugged, and
went round to the side door.

The side door and the front door and the wide doors over the cellar
steps, and the bedroom windows which opened on the roof of the shed—they
were all locked.

She went back to the kitchen door and stood looking at it. She was
eighteen now, strong, well-balanced as she shifted her weight from one
bare foot to the other, well-balanced as she thought.

She was hungry and naked. It was growing cool. She gazed without
expression at the expressionless windows. A small breeze stroked her
body, leaving a brief puckering of gooseflesh. She stepped to the door
and tried it again. It never occurred to her to knock. If her father
were inside at all, the chances were that he would be in the study or
upstairs, to be called only by thunderous hammering—something
unthinkable in that house. There could be no possibility that her father
had locked the doors by mistake, for he was not a man who made mistakes.

Well, then, she must wait. She went to the shed, which was warm and dry,
if nothing else. But—it was locked. So was the barn.

Then she knew.

_“You must find your own way … you will leave. You must. For a year …”_
It had been that way when first she was left by herself in the house;
when first lunch-time had come and she suddenly realized that he had
made no effort to prepare it. Always there had been a warning
beforehand, buried in a lesson, perhaps, or mentioned casually in
conversation. And this was like him. She must leave, but she would not
be sent away, with clothes and money and a starting-place somewhere.

She went into the garden and looked about her. The tomatoes were green,
but edible. It would be a crime to take any of the baby ears of corn,
but in this emergency … she shook her head stubbornly. Not the corn. Let
it grow. It was not responsible for her plight. A rabbit, then.

She walked to the hutches. The rabbits tumbled towards her, wanting more
food. She smiled at them. There had always been rabbits.
Always … suddenly it became clear to her that these rabbits were part of
the place, as the corn was, as were the tomatoes. And she no longer had
any part of it.

She nodded, looked briefly, bleakly, up at the house and strode away
through the orchard. She did not look back for an hour, when she was on
the mountain’s shoulder. Then she paused.

The house was invisible now, and dark. So he had gone away. She wondered
remotely if she hated him. She had never hated anything in her life. She
missed him, however, as much as one can who has never attached any
importance to the idea of loneliness.

Beyond the house, far beyond, the lights of the town drifted like crumbs
in a cup of ink. She had had no compulsion to go to the town. She was
not known there, but she knew that she resembled her father very
strongly, and that she would be brought back to the house by
well-meaning but uncomprehending strangers who would do what they could
to upset her father’s plans for her. She did not question those plans
for a moment. Her father held a position in her cosmos outside such
mutable abstracts. His law governed her as completely as did gravity.

The wind touched her again, colder now, and, as before, its breath
brought her back to her immediate problem. She cast about her for a
fallen tree, found one, and broke off a thick four-foot piece. She
worked her way carefully into the darkening forest. A glance up through
the trees told her that tonight, at least, she need not fear rain.

She chose a spot where two large trees grew close together, with a bed
of moss at their roots. She gathered up dry leaves and piled them up
over and beside the moss. Setting her club close to her hand, she lay
down, pulled a mountain of leaves over her, and almost instantly lost
her hunger in a deep sleep.

She woke before the sun was up, rested and ravenous. She stood up,
shaking the leaves from her firm body, and immediately set about the
business of breakfast. Retracing her steps of the night before, she
reached a meadow. She gathered clover heads and tender shoots of upland
grass, and found, to her joy, the “walking” vine known as a Judas
traveller. She uprooted about twenty feet of its tough, meandering stem
and carefully stripped it until she had ten or twelve feet of flexible
withe. This she took back into the woods, made a noose-snare by tying
down a sapling so that when triggered, it would snap up and draw the
noose tight. She put down the clover and shoots as bait, blocking them
from behind so that they must be approached through the noose, and then
went back to the meadow. She selected some round, smooth stones, and
then stepped to a tree at the edge of the forest, put her back against
the trunk, and stood there motionless.

The sun was up now. Great lazy clouds floated overhead, brindling the
hills. She saw a woodchuck out on the meadow, and let it be. Hungry as
she was, she did not consider its rank flesh worth the trouble of
cutting it off from its nearby burrow. She waited patiently.

A movement caught her eye—something like a clump of grass moving within
the field of grass. Moving very carefully, she set down her handful of
stones. She raised her club up and back in her right hand, and with her
left tossed a pebble to the side of the moving thing she had seen. As it
fell, the surprised head of a grouse popped upward. Quietly’s club,
unerringly thrown to turn end over end in a horizontal plane, caught the
bird solidly on its ruff. In a half-dozen great bounds she was on the
stunned creature and had wrung its neck.

She carried it back into the woods toward the two trees where she had
slept. On her way was the snare. The sapling was upright, and a fat
cottontail hung kicking in the noose. It had caught him around the
withers; he was very much alive and frightened. Quietly looked at him
thoughtfully for a moment, then dropped her grouse and bent the sapling
down, catching the rabbit deftly at the nape of the neck. She slackened
the noose, smoothed the animal’s rumpled fur, and let him go, smiling a
little as his powder-puff quarters disappeared through the trees. She
had the grouse, and no way to carry anything extra. In addition, she had
perfect confidence in her ability to get more food when she wanted it.

From a basalt outcropping she got an edged stone. She stripped some dead
reeds for the soft, dry pith inside, crumbled it, and pounded with the
stone on the rock until she had a spark. Nursing it carefully with her
breath, feeding it with more pith and then with leaves, she soon had a
healthy little fire. She spitted the bird with a green stick, singed it,
plucked it. Then, pinching out the soft underflesh, she cut it with her
stone against the rock and cleaned the grouse. With two forked sticks
she made a frame for the spit. She piled stones around her fire to
shelter it and to concentrate the heat. Then she squatted beside it and,
between turnings, occupied herself by patiently combing out her long
heavy hair with her fingers, and braiding it tightly.

At last it was ready—or at least, ready enough for her clamoring
appetite. She ate slowly, however, and she ate the whole bird. She took
the neck-bones apart for the tiny succulent strips of muscle there, and
she cracked the other bones and sucked out the marrow. Then she gathered
up the remains, scooped out a hole, and buried them. She drew up a large
chunk of root to the fire, to keep it fed for the next few hours, wiped
her hands and mouth carefully on some grass, and with a green twig
meticulously cleaned her teeth.

Then she stretched out in a bright patch of warm mid-morning sun and
quietly, half somnolently, began to think.

She had nothing—no clothes, no shelter, no knife or axe or other tools.
She did not question the fact that she must take care of herself
completely for at least a year.

She was not worried, and she was certainly not frightened. Fear is a
functional thing, and she was happy to yield to it when it had a
function. Now it had none, so she was not afraid.

She rolled over and cupped her chin in her hands. Food? Well, hunting
was good. She could snare or club what she needed, and if she had to go
a day or two without, she could stand it. There would be nuts and
berries throughout the fall, and eggs aplenty in the spring and early
summer. There was plenty of ash to be fire-cured and shaped and trimmed
with stone, so that she could make bows and arrows. She had killed deer
before this way. Clothing? She wanted none, at least until the cold
came. By then she should have enough pelts to keep her warm—fox and deer
and skunk and possibly coon and beaver. There were caves in these parts;
she could certainly find one. She could make rope from grasses for her
snares, and possibly dig a pitfall or two. It would be hard, sometimes,
but she would survive.

She lay still for a long while, her mind flickering over this detail and
that. Gradually she let it go blank. _What is complicated is by
definition not important_. This above all was her father’s creed, and
she had learned from babyhood that, after a time of preoccupation with
details, it paid to leave them for a while to see what basic, if any,
emerged from their framework.

It came, without effort on her part. It was a sudden realization that
her father had not turned her out so that she could prove her woodcraft.
That was past proving. Had he expected her to live off the land for a
year, he could have judged her ability to do it years ago without this
specific trial. No, he expected her to go farther.

She forced her thoughts to turn to the towns. The only one she had ever
seen was the one near the house. She had never been there, but she had
seen it from the mountainside. She remembered:

“Why are they all clustered together like sheep in the winter, Father?”

“Like botflies on carrion,” he had answered. “They are built that way
because they are used by folk who cannot bear to be by themselves.”

“Why not?”

“Each of them seeks better company than he finds when he is alone.
You’ll see for yourself, one day.”

Quietly sat up and looked at the trees around her, and listened for a
moment to the whispering song of their high branches. She shut her eyes
and remembered the pictures she had seen, of crowds pushing up narrow,
dirty streets, of ill-kempt children and of fat, bald, sickly doctors
whose duty it was to heal and to cure. She thought of the noble things:
great curved dams and high buildings with their windows lit. So much
that was wrong—so much that was not wrong but was simply inconsistent.
And it would be noisy, noisy, noisy.

Why not live out her year here in the hills, with her fire-building and
her hunting and her thoughts? It would not be so different; her father
had said, “The same laws, the same forces, apply to men everywhere as
apply to beasts. Kill or be killed, fill your belly, reproduce your
kind. The difference is only in the fact that men kill and eat and
reproduce beyond necessity, without regard to their basic need.”

That was it, then—that difference which he wanted her to see. And why
not let her accept the truth of it, without this?

She remembered again—years back. “Quietly, what would it feel like if I
hit you, hard, with my open hand?”

She had considered, carefully. “It would thump and it would sting.”

He had nodded, and then lashed out brutally and struck her. It was one
of the very few times when he had suddenly gathered her up and held her
close. She was stiff and silent for a long moment. Then she trembled and
hid her face in his shoulder, and cried without making a sound. He held
her, rocking her a little, until she quieted, and then said, “Never
forget this, child. You did not cry when you answered my question. You
could not; you had no reason to. You did _not_ know what it would feel
like. Now you are crying. Imagination is a good thing, but it can only
approximate experience. You can only learn by doing. If ever you want to
know what a thing is like, do it, Quietly, do it.”

Quietly rose and stepped to her fire to push the root-chunk further into
the coals. She had a year, and the decision of what to do with it was
hers. Her father’s wish was obviously that she live out her year in the
world—other people’s world. She could follow his wish, or not. If she
did not, she would survive; by the same token, she had no doubt of
surviving if she did what he obviously wanted. Survival was not the
question, nor was it a matter of which she would enjoy the most; for
enjoyment had always been a substance to be squeezed from events as they
were lived, and she would enjoy what she did, or not, only as her
capacity for enjoyment changed, and not as events dictated. The
important consideration sprang from her training. If, in any matter, she
did what was expected of her, she was rewarded by the food or the quiet
or the freedom her action had earned. If she did not do as her father
wished, she took the consequences—not in punishment from him, but in the
exact deprivation that her lack warranted. If it were made possible for
her to eat, and through her own choice she did not eat, then she went
hungry. If, in the afternoon, she refused the privilege of a certain one
of her father’s books, that book was unavailable to her in the evening.
To accede to her father’s wishes was invariably to do the functional
thing, to make the most of opportunity when it offered itself; and so
rigorously did he control his environment—and hers—that there never had
been an accident which proved this principle false.

To stay in the hills, or to go to the towns … she was free to choose.
Purely by the placement of events, she knew which her father wished her
to do. The fact that she did not want the opportunity to live among
other people was unimportant. The fact that she may never have another
opportunity if she did not take this one was important, vitally so.

She stared into the fire, felt its radiant heat, watched its pale sunlit
flames. The living flame was the symbol of her competence here in the
hills. Its vitality was the product of her own hands. She was its
master.

Abruptly she bent, scattered it, kicked earth over its coals, turned the
heavy, glowing chunk face downward in the ground and palmed earth around
it. Then she marched off, leaving behind her, already forgotten, the
dwindling smoke of her indecision.

By evening she had crossed the range through a high pass, and was
descending the westward slope. Twice she had seen people, and both times
she had kept herself hidden. She was determined to live with people, but
she wished to choose her own point of entrance. The first she saw was a
young man in what she considered a bewildering amount of clothing—rough
shoes, heavy socks, breeches and a flannel shirt, and over all a
knapsack and a bandolier. She gained on him, keeping to the rocks in the
pass, and was about to call when he stopped, aimed his rifle at some
movement on the hillside, and fired. The roar of the gun caught Quietly
completely by surprise, and she dropped behind a boulder, rocking back
and forth, with her hands over her ears. She had heard guns before, but
never this close. She peered out after a moment; he was staring fixedly
across the cut, with his gun resting on his left forearm. He raised it
abruptly and fired twice more, waited, shrugged, and then trudged off.
Quietly sat watching him in utter amazement and disgust. Far off on the
hillside she could discern the jerky motions of a rock-squirrel kicking
and kicking its life away. The man had hit it with his first bullet, and
had fired again as it writhed there. It was wanton; it was useless.
Quietly felt no particular pity for the animal; she was not a
sentimentalist, and had a scale of values for the lower orders. What
offended her was the waste of a life, of powder, even of skill—the skill
of the man himself and that of the precision workers who had made his
weapon. He had not wanted the creature for fur or flesh, but had as his
only apparent desire an affirmation of the evident fact that he was
bigger and stronger and more intelligent than a chipmunk. Enter
civilization she would, but not in the company of this pervert.

Her second encounter was just over the crest of the mountain. There was
a well-beaten trail following the ridge, and near the point at which she
encountered it was a shelter made of logs, and roofed startlingly with
asphalt shingle. There were neat piles of wood stacked beside it, and
from it came the rhythmic sound of a voice—a light, full voice, chanting
in a near-monotone. Quietly drew closer, stopped near the open window
with one hand on the logs, and listened:

_“One moment in Annihilation’s Waste_,

_One moment, of the Well of Life to taste—_

_The Stars are setting and the Caravan_

_Starts for the Dawn of Nothing—OH! make haste!”_

The “OH!” emerged as an explosive squeak. Quietly started and pursed her
lips. What _was_ this?

_“How long, how long, in definite Pursuit_

_Of This and That endeavor and dispute?…_

(and here the voice rang with something between a toll and a tinkle)

_ … Better be merry with the fruitful Grape_

_Than sadder after none, or bitter, Fruit.”_

Slowly, Quietly leaned to the window and with one eye peered inside.

A thin young man with a pot-belly, dressed in shorts which emphasized
his bony knees, strode back and forth within the shelter, holding in
front of him a battered book with a rococo cover done in gray and
tarnished gold. His face was pink, his nose was peeling, and the backs
of his legs were fish-belly white.

On the earthen floor by the far wall crouched a girl of about Quietly’s
age, with coarse hair, spectacles, bad teeth and an adoring expression.
“Oh, Carstairs,” she cooed, as the young man stopped to blow his nose on
a khaki handkerchief, “You read gorgeously—just _gorgeously!_ Anyone can
tell—” and here her voice became a whisper—“that you’ve really _lived!_”

Quietly fled.

Three hours and ten miles later, Quietly walked the timberline tiredly,
wondering whether to keep to the woods and kill something for her
supper, or to go on until she found some suitable crevice between the
scales of civilization into which she might crawl. She was hungry and
she had come a long way. She skirted cornfields now, and buckwheat, and
for a while she followed a fence which enclosed grazing land, though she
saw no cattle. She judged that she had another two hours of light and an
hour of dusk. If she were going to a make a snare, she would have to do
it very soon.

Suddenly she stopped, head up, nostrils dilating. From the woods to the
right she heard faint sounds of splashing and calling. A pleasant vision
of cool water crossed her mind. She had found a spring about noon, and
had been able to wet her face and arms in it and drink, but that had
been hours ago. She turned toward the sounds.

She reached a creek about a quarter of a mile north, and followed it
upstream a few hundred yards to its source, a small spring-fed lake
surrounded by trees. Across the water was a shelving bank, on which were
scattered towels and robes and clothing. Splashing about in the water
were five girls, screaming and giggling and quite as naked as she. She
sat down in the shadows between the trees to watch them. She noticed
with some surprise that their bodies were tanned except for patches of
white around their breasts and hips. She nodded to herself. She had
learned of the clothing convention, and was quite aware that it was of
major importance among people “outside.” This piebald tanning was a
strong reminder to her of the fact that she must circumscribe her own
behavior to this and many another taboo if she were to win acceptance
among people.

She tried to remember if this taboo applied in a group of the same sex,
and could not remember immediately. It obviously did not apply to the
girls in the lake. Yet if she, an outsider, appeared among them, it
might be regarded as a violation.

There was a violent spasm of coughing from the water. One of the girls
was floundering near the middle of the pond, her breath coming raggedly.
Immediately there was a commotion among the others.

“Bee! Bee-_triss!_ Clara—look! Bee’s drownding!”

There was a chorus of frightened exclamations. One of the girls said,
“I’m going after her!”

“No!” cried another. “You can’t swim well enough! You’ll drown too!” and
she laid restraining hands on the would-be rescuer, who half-heartedly
fought her off. The other two climbed out of the water as if it were
suddenly hot, and stood on the bank, where they could see better,
wringing their hands.

“Oh-h!” moaned the one called Clara. “Miss O’Laughlin will kill us for
this. We’re not allowed to swim without suits!”

“She’ll never know if we don’t tell her,” chattered one of the girls on
the bank.

“She will too when they find Bee’s body,” said the other ghoulishly.

“We could say that only Bee—”

“Help! Help!” screamed the would-be savior.

“Help!” all the girls screamed, including the one who was drowning.

There are certain zones of indecency, Quietly was thinking, peculiar to
certain lands and certain times. In certain tribes in Africa virgins
must go naked until they marry, when custom demands that they don a
narrow belt. In the Far East it has long been the custom to cover the
faces of the women. In Bali the only woman who covers her breasts is the
courtesan. The question is, would the effect of my saving this girl be
cancelled by my indecency in their eyes?

It was a very complicated matter. She wished—Complicated? Unimportant,
then. What was important? That she, Quietly, be accepted sooner or
later. Was there anything more important here?

Yes, there was. A life was being lost uselessly. If saving it meant the
disapproval of these people, she could get away from them and try again.

She slipped into the water, took a deep breath, found a rock under her
feet and pushed off strongly. She swam fifty feet under water, with the
breath trickling deliciously from her nostrils and tickling the dusty
sides of her neck. She broke surface and trod water, getting her
bearings. The drowning girl was not in sight. She glanced at the bank.
The four girls were all out of the water now, clutching at each other in
a noisy, hysterical ecstasy. She heard one of them say, “All this
yelling … have the whole countryside here in a minute … where’s my
sunsuit?” Then, from the corner of her eye, she saw a disturbance in the
water. She swung to it and sounded. She found bottom at about fourteen
feet, according to the pain in her ears. She beat her way along it,
until something thumped her on the shoulder. She rolled over and looked
up, and in the dimness saw the doubled-up body of the girl Beatrice,
with weakly flailing hands and round, terrified eyes.

Quietly got her feet under her and sprang upward, winding her hand in
the girl’s long hair as she shot past. They came to the surface
together, the last of Quietly’s wind whooshing out of her. She slipped
her arm around the girl’s neck, and with a thrust of her knee turned the
half-unconscious creature over on her back. With Bee’s chin in the crook
of her arm, her shoulder holding Bee’s head up, Quietly swam for shore
with a powerful side-stroke.

“Look!” squeaked one of the girls.

“It’s a _man!_” gasped Clara, and dived for her clothes.

“It is _not_,” said another, already in a brief sunsuit.

The four stood open-mouthed as Quietly found footing and stepped up the
bank, carrying Beatrice in her arms. Two of them splashed into the water
to clutch and grab and weep. “Speak to me, Bee darling!” Quietly
shouldered her way through them with such directness that the girl in
the sunsuit sat forcibly in the water.

“Who’s _she?_”

“She _pushed_ me!”

Quietly swung her burden to the ground, turned the limp body over with
her foot so that it was face-down, and knelt with one of her knees
between the girl’s lower thighs. She turned Bee’s head to the right,
separated the clenched teeth, pulled the tongue out, and then began a
steady pressure and release on her floating ribs.

“Get a towel!”

“Chafe her wrists!”

“Where did _she_ come from?”

“Is she dead?” asked Clara of Quietly. Quietly said nothing. She was
counting to herself, to get the rhythm right.

“Miss O’Laughlin’ll _murder_ us!”

“Will you _look_ at the callouses on her _feet!_”

“Bee’s dead! Oh, oh, oh-h-h!”

“No she’s not. She’s upchucking.”

Quietly slacked off until the weak spasm had paused, and then went on. A
minute later Bee moaned and coughed. Quietly sat back on her haunches
and waited. The breathing was irregular, but stronger. She rose and
turned the girl over on her back. The four immediately clustered around,
weeping, lifting Bee’s head, rubbing her wrists, begging her to say
something. Quietly could have walked off at that moment and it would
never have been noticed. Instead she stood by, her face impassive,
concealing a mingled amazement and amusement at this stupendous
misdirection of nervous energy.

Bee was helped to a sitting position now, supported by the affectionate
arms of her friends. She began to cry softly. Clara, for the moment
deprived of anything to embrace by the importunities of the other three,
rose and came to Quietly.

“Say,” she said, “That was wonderful of you. I just don’t know what we
would’ve done without you, really I don’t.”

Quietly smiled. Clara asked, “Where did you come from? You seemed to
come right up out of the bottom of the lake!”

Quietly hesitated. There was something she had been taught once about
this kind of situation … She remembered it now. Her father had been
reading aloud; it was one of the eighteenth-century picaresque novels.
At its involved climax, he put the book down and said,

“You see the amount of trouble a man can get into by talking too much,
Quietly? Among men, the less you say, the better. Human beings have,
among their other diseases, a crazy desire to explain things, each in
his own way. If a man knows little about you, he will fill in the
details to suit himself. If you tell him all the details, the chances
are that he will not believe you. Let him, and all his brethren, draw
his own conclusions about you, and neither confirm nor deny anything.
Then he may compliment himself on his insight, and you may be assured of
your privacy. The most fortunate humans are those who, by preoccupation
or through illness, find themselves deaf and dumb.”

All language has its labeling nuances, its idiom, its little signposts
of accent and emphasis. Quietly knew that her progress among people
would be faster if she could start at the level of her first associates.
If to say little was good, to say nothing would be even better. So, in
answer to Clara’s questions, she simply smiled.

“What’s the matter; can’t you talk?”

Quietly shook her head.

“You can hear me all right, though.”

Quietly nodded.

Clara left her standing there and went to the group around Beatrice.
There was a rapid and exclamatory conference and some pointing and
gaping.



THE MUSIC


HOSPITAL …

They wouldn’t let me go, even when the clatter of dishes and the
meaningless talk and complaining annoyed me. They knew it annoyed me;
they must have. Starch and boredom and the flat-white dead smell. They
knew it. They knew I hated it, so every night was the same.

I could go out. Not really; not all the way out, to the places where
people were not dressed in gray robes and long itchy flannel. But I
could go outside where I could see the sky and smell the river smell and
smoke a cigarette. If I closed the door tight and moved all the way over
to the rail, and watched and smelled very carefully, sometimes I could
forget the things inside the building and those inside me, too.

I liked the night. I lit my cigarette and I looked at the sky. Clotted,
it was, and clean between clouds. The air was cold and warmed me, and
down on the river a long golden ribbon was tied to a light on the other
side, and lay across the water. My music came to me again, faintly,
tuning up. I was very proud of my music because it was mine. It was a
thing that belonged to me, and not to the hospital like the itchy
flannel and the gray robe. The hospital had old red buildings and fences
and a great many nurses who knew briskly of bedpans, but it had no music
about it, anywhere, anywhere.

A light mist lay just above the ground because there were garbage cans
in a battered row, and the mist was very clean and would not go among
them. Entrance music played gently for the cat.

It was a black and white mangy cat. It padded out of the shadow into the
clearing before the cans and stood with its head on one side, waving its
tail. It was lean and moved like a beautiful thing.

Then there was the rat, the fat little brown bundle with its long worm
of a tail. The rat glided out from between the cans, froze, and dropped
on its belly. The music fell in pitch to meet the rise in volume, and
the cat tensed. There was a pain about me somewhere and I realized
distantly that my fingernails were biting into my tongue. _My_ rat, _my_
cat, _my_ music. The cat sprang, and the rat drew first blood and
squealed and died out there in the open where it could see its own
blood. The cat licked its wound and yowled and tore at the quivering
thing. There was blood on the rat and on the cat and on my tongue.

I turned away, shaken and exultant, as the music repeated its
death-motif in echo. She was coming out of the building. Inside she was
Miss Starchy but now she was a brown bundle—a little fat brown bundle. I
was lean and moved like a beautiful thing … she smiled at me and turned
to the steps. I was very happy and I moved along beside her, looking
down at her soft throat. We went out into the mist together. In front of
the cans she stopped and looked at me with her eyes very wide.

The cat watched curiously and then went on eating. We went on eating and
listening to the music.



UNITE AND CONQUER


THEY WERE DIGGING this drainage canal, and the timekeeper drove out to
the end, where the big crane-dragline was working, and called the
operator down to ask a lot of questions about a half-hour of overtime.
Next thing you know, they were going round and round on the fill. The
young superintendent saw that fight and yelled for them to cut it out.
They ignored him. Not wanting to dirty his new breeches, the super swung
up into the machine, loaded three yards of sand into bucket, hoisted it
high, swung, and dumped it on the scrambling pair. The operator and the
timekeeper floundered out from under, palmed sand out of their eyes and
mouths, and with a concerted roar converged on the cab of the machine.
They had the super out on the ground and were happily taking turns
punching his head when a labor foreman happened by, and he and his men
stopped the fuss.

The red-headed youngster put down the book. “It’s true here, too,” he
told his brother. “I mean, what I was saying about almost all of Wells’
best science fiction. In each case there’s a miracle—a Martian invasion
in ‘War of the Worlds,’ a biochemical in ‘Food of the Gods,’ and a new
gaseous isotope in ‘In the Days of the Comet.’ And it ultimately makes
all of mankind work together.”

The brother was in college—had been for seven months—and was very wise.
“That’s right. He knew it would take a miracle. I think he forgot that
when he began to write sociological stuff. As Dr. Pierce remarked, he
sold his birthright for a pot of message.”

“Excuse me,” said the dark man called Rod. He rose and went to the back
of the café and the line of phone booths, while the girl with the tilted
nose and the red sandals stared fondly after him. The Blonde arrived.

“Ah,” she mewed, “alone, I see. But of course.” She sat down.

“I’m with Rod,” said the girl with the sandals, adding primly, “He’s
phoning.”

“Needed to talk to someone, no doubt,” said the Blonde.

“Probably,” said the other, smiling at her long fingers, “he needed to
come back to earth.”

The Blonde barely winced. “Oh well. I suppose he must amuse himself
between his serious moments. He’ll have one tomorrow night, you know. At
the dance. Pity I won’t see you there. Unless, of course, you come with
someone else—”

“He’s working tomorrow night!” blurted the girl with the sandals, off
guard.

“You could call it that,” said the Blonde placidly.

“Look, sunshine,” said the other girl evenly, “why don’t you stop
kidding yourself? Rod isn’t interested in you and your purely local
color. He isn’t even what you want. If you’re looking for a soulmate, go
find yourself a wolfhound.”

“Darling,” said the Blonde appreciatively, and with murder in her
mascara. “You know, you might get him, at that. _If_ you brush up on
your cooking, and if he can keep his appetite by going blind—” She
leaned forward suddenly. “Look there. Who _is_ that floozy?”

They turned to the back of the café. The dark young man was holding both
hands of a slender but curvesome girl with deep auburn hair. She was
laughing coyly up at him.

“Fancy Pants,” breathed the girl with the red sandals. She turned to the
Blonde. “I know whereof I speak. Her clothesline is right under my
window, and—”

“The little stinker,” said the Blonde. She watched another pretty
convulsion of merriment. “Clothesline, hm-m-m? Listen—I had a friend
once who had a feud on with a biddy in the neighborhood. There something
about a squirt gun and some ink—”

“Well, well,” said the girl in the sandals. She thought a moment,
watching Rod and the redhead. “Where could I get a squirt gun?”

“My kid brother has a water pistol. I got it for him for his birthday.
Can you meet me here at seven o’clock?”

“I certainly can. I’ll get the ink. Black ink. _India_ ink!”

The Blonde rose. “Be sweet to him,” she said swiftly, “so he won’t guess
who fixed Fancy Pants.”

“I will. But not too sweet. The heel. Darling, you’re wonderful—”

The Blonde winked and walked away. And at a nearby table, a gentleman
who had been eavesdropping shamelessly stuffed a soft roll into an
incipient roar of laughter, and then began to choke.

“Colonel Simmons,” said the annunciator.

“Well, for pete’s sake!” said Dr. Simmons. “Send him in. Send him right
in! And—cancel that demonstration. No … don’t cancel it. Postpone it.”

“Until when, Doctor?”

“Until I get there.”

“But—it’s for the Army—”

“My brother’s the Army, too!” snapped the physicist and switched off.

A knock. “Come in. Leroy, you dog!”

“Well, Muscles.” The colonel half ran into the room, gripped the
scientist by the upper arm, scanned his face up, back, and across. Their
eyes were gray, the colonel’s gray and narrow, the doctor’s gray and
wide. “It must’ve been—” they said in unison, and then laughed together.

“Eight years, anyway,” said the colonel.

“All of that. Gosh, gosh.” He shook his head. “You and your shiny
buttons.”

There was a silence. “Hardly know where to begin, what to say, h-m-m?”
grinned the colonel. “What’ve you been doing lately?”

“Oh … you know. Applied physics.”

“Hah!” snorted the colonel. “Question: Mr. Michaelangelo, what are you
doing? Answer: Mixing pigments. Come on, now; what since you invented
magnefilm?”

“Nothing much. Couple of things too unimportant to talk about, couple
more too important to mention.”

“Your old garrulous self, I see. Come on, Muscles. Security regulations
don’t apply here, and between us especially.”

_That’s what you think_, thought Dr. Simmons. “Of course not,” he said.
“What branch are you with now?”

“Publicly, the Air Corps,” said the colonel, indicating his wings.
“Actually, I’m on the Board of Strategy. This won’t be the kind of war
which can be fought with semipublic conferences and decisions after
advisement in the General Staff. The Board operates practically
underground, without any publicity, and without any delay.”

“Board of Strategy, eh? I’d heard only vaguely … and I’m in a position
to hear plenty. Well now. When you say no delay, what do you mean?”

“I mean this,” said the colonel. He put his hands behind him on a high
lab table and lifted himself up on it. He crossed his bright boots and
swung them. “We have plans … look; you know how M-Day plans work, don’t
you?”

“Certainly. The personnel of draft boards is all chosen, the
questionnaires are printed and almost entirely distributed, the leases
and domains of examination centers are arranged for, and so on and on.
When mobilization is called, everything starts operating without a
hitch. You hope,” he added with a grin. “Why?”

“The Board operates the same way,” said his brother. “But where
Selective Service has only one big problem to arrange for in detail we
have—” he shrugged. “Name your figure. We have planned what to do if,
for example, Russia attacks us, if we attack Russia, if France attacks
Brazil, or if Finland takes a swing at Iraq. What’s funny?”

“I was thinking of the legend about the emperor who tried to grant the
reward asked for by a certain hero, who had stipulated simply that he be
given some wheat, the amount to be determined by a hypothetical
chessboard, putting one grain on the first square, two on the second,
four on the third, eight on the fourth, and so on … anyway, it wound up
with an amount equal to a couple of years’ world supply, and with the
empire and all its resources in the hands of our hero. Your plans are
like that. I mean, if one of the possibilities you mention should occur,
but if you should lose the third battle instead of winning it as
scheduled, why, you’ll have a whole new set of plans to make. And this
applies to every one of your original master plans.”

“Oh, don’t misunderstand me. I don’t mean that each plan is as detailed
as the M-Day deal. Lord, no. The plans are policies of action, rather
than blueprints. They stay within the bounds of statistical probability,
though we push those bounds outward as far as possible. I’ve mentioned
possible enemies, and possible combatants aside from enemies. There are
also plans covering combinations and permutations of alliance. Anything
is possible after such precedent, for example, as the situation in the
Second War, when our close ally Russia was at peace with our worst
enemy.” He laughed. “If that happened in human instead of international
terms, with my closest friend lunching daily with a man who was openly
trying to kill me, we’d call it fantastic. Maybe it is,” he said
cheerfully, “but it’s most engrossing.”

“You rather enjoy it, don’t you?”

“I have never had such fascinating work in all my life.”

“I didn’t mean strategy, soldier-boy. I meant war.”

“War? I s’pose it is. Now another thing the Board is doing … wait a
minute. Muscles! You’re not still the dewy-eyed idealist you used to
be—brotherhood of mankind, and all that, are you?

“I invented the sonic disruptor, didn’t I?” _You probably think that
answers your question_, he thought bitterly.

“So you did. A very healthy development in you and in the noble art of
warfare. Nicest little side arm in history. Busts a man all up inside
without breaking the skin. So little mess.”

_Healthy!_ Dr. Simmons stared at his brother, who was looking into his
cigarette case. _Healthy! And I developed the disruptor to focus
ultrasonic vibrations under the skin, to homogenize cancerous tissue. I
never dreamed they’d … ah, neither did Nobel_. “Go on about the Board,”
he said.

“What was I … oh yes. Not only have we planned the obvious
things—political situations, international crises, campaigns and
alliances, but we are keeping a very close watch on technology. The War
Department has, at long last, abandoned the policy of fighting this war
with the last war’s weapons. Remember how Hitler astonished the world
with the elementary stunt of organizing liaison between his tanks and
his dive bombers? Remember the difficulties they had in promoting the
bazooka to replace the mortar in jungle warfare? And how the War
Department refused to back the Wright Brothers? There’ll be no more of
that.”

“You mean we’re preparing to use the latest in everything? Really use
it?”

“That’s right. Atomic energy and jet propulsion we know about. Then
there’s biological warfare, both disease and crop-hormone techniques.
But it doesn’t stop there. As a matter of fact, those things, and other
proven developments, account for only a small part of our plans. We have
the go-ahead on supplies, weapons, equipment, and techniques which
haven’t even been developed yet. Some haven’t even been invented yet!”

Dr. Simmons whistled, “Like what?”

The colonel smiled, rolled his eyes up thoughtfully. “Like impenetrable
force fields, mass multipliers—that’s a cute hypothesis, Muscles.
Increase the effective mass of a substance, and the results could be
interesting. Particularly if it were radioactive. Antigravity. Telepath
scrambles, which throw interrupting frequencies in and around thought
waves, if thoughts _are_ waves … we’ve considered practically every
gadget and gimmick in every story and article in every science-fiction
magazine published in the last thirty years, and have planned what to do
in case it suddenly pops up.”

_Ignoring all the utopian, philosophical, sociological stories, of
course_, thought Dr. Simmons. He said, “So your visit here isn’t purely
social?”

“Gosh no. I’m with the observation group which came here to see your
Spy-Eye in action. What is it, anyhow? And how did it get the cute
soapsuds name?”

Dr. Simmons smiled. “One of the armchair boys in the front office used
to work in an advertising agency. The device is a ‘Self-Propelled
Information Interceptor’—SPII—which, once it touched that huckster
brain, became ‘Spy-Eye.’ As to just what it is, you’ll see that for
yourself if you attend the demonstration, which starts as soon as we’ve
finished talking.”

“You mean you postponed it until I was through with you?”

“That’s right.” _I thought you’d like that_, he thought, watching the
pleased grin on his brother’s face. “Tell me something, Leroy. All these
plans … are we at war?”

“Are we … well, no. You know that.”

“But these preparations. All they lack is a timetable.” He squinted
quizzically. “By golly, I believe you have that, too.”

“We have plenty,” the colonel sidestepped, winking.

“Choose sides yet? What’s the line-up?”

“I won’t tell you that. No, I’m not worried about security, it’s just
that I might be wrong. Things move so fast these days. I’ll tell you one
thing, though. We already have our neutral ground.”

“Oh yes, of course—like Switzerland and Sweden. I’ve always wondered
what exact powers kept them neutral.”

“Well, if you’re going to fight a war, you’ve got to have some way to
exchange prisoners and have meetings with various interested parties,
and so on—”

“Yep. And it used to come in pretty handy for certain manufacturers.”

The colonel eyed him. “Are you sure you’re off that lion-and-lamb kick?”

Dr. Simmons grimaced. “I think the Spy-Eye can answer that adequately.”

The colonel slipped off his perch. “Yes, let’s get to it,” he said
eagerly.

They went to the door. “By the way,” said Dr. Simmons, “just what have
you picked out for your neutral ground?”

“Japan,” said the colonel.

“Nice of ’em to agree to anything so close to home.”

“Nice of ’em? Don’t be silly! It’s the only way they can be sure it
won’t be fortified.”

“Oh,” said his brother. They went out.

The demonstration went off without a hitch, and afterward the six Army
observers and the plant technicians repaired to the projection room for
Dr. Simmons’ summation.

He talked steadily and tiredly, and his thoughts talked on at the same
time. As he reeled off specifications and characteristics, his mind
rambled along, sometimes following the spoken thought, sometimes
paralleling it, sometimes commenting acidly or humorously, always
tiredly. It was a trapped thing, that talking mind, but it was
articulate.

“… five-point-eight feet long over-all, an aerodynamic streamline, with
its largest diameter only two-point-three-seven feet. Slide One, please.
As you have seen, it has one propelling and three supporting jets. These
three are coupled directly to the same outlet valve, which is controlled
by an absolute altimeter. The whole is, of course, gyro-stabilized. It
is capable of trans-sonic speeds, but can very nearly hover, subject
only to a small nutation which can probably be designed out.”

_It was going to be a mail rocket_, commented his thought.

“Its equipment includes the usual self-guiding devices, a coding
flight-recorder, and radio receivers tuned to various pre-selected FM,
AM, and radar channels. In regard to radar, should it pick up any radar
impulses close enough or strong enough to suggest detection, it changes
course and speed radically. Should they persist, the Spy-Eye releases
‘window’—aluminum-foil strips of various lengths—and returns to its
starting point by preset and devious course.

“The spy device itself is relatively simple. It uses magnefilm, taking
pictures of the source of any desired radio signal. When the signal is
received, it locates the beam, aims the camera, and records the audio
signal magnetically. Of course, the synchronization between the picture
and the audio recording is perfect, because of the magnefilm.”

“Will you explain magnefilm, please, Doctor?”

“Certainly, Captain. It was developed through research into the rather
wide variation in dielectric characteristics of the early plastics—the
styrenes, ureas, and so on. Molecular arrangement was altered in various
plastics until a transparent conductor was developed. It was not very
far from that to the production of a plastic with a remarkably high
magnetic density. Once this was made in a transparent, strong, pliable
form, it was simple to make photographic film of it. The audio impulses
are impressed directly upon the film, as in any magnetic tape system.”
_And it was invented for 8-mm. movie addicts, so that they could have
sound film_, added his thought. _Now it’s a secret weapon_.

“The purpose of the Spy-Eye, of course, is to pick up short-range
transmissions—vertically beamed walkie-talkies, line-of-sight FM
messages, and the like. Since these are usually well beyond the range of
the enemy’s listening posts, they are seldom coded. Therefore, with this
device, we have access to a wealth of intelligence that has so far been
regarded as unreachable.”

He signaled the projection room. The screen came to life. During the
test, the various officers had spoken into the microphones of several AM
and FM transmitters spotted within a quarter-mile. Unerringly, after a
few spoken words, the screen showed the sources and their identification
numerals, painted on large white signboards.

“In enemy territory,” remarked the doctor dryly, “we shall probably have
to do without the boards.” There was polite laughter. “If you will
remember, gentlemen, the selector was next set to pick up something on
the broadcast band.”

The screen, blank, gave an agonized groan. Then a child’s voice said
clearly, “What’s the matter, Daddy? Has that old acid indigestion got
you down again?” “Owoo,” said the man’s voice. The screen suddenly
showed, far below, the tall towers of a transmitting antenna. “Honey
child, you’d better go for the doctor. Your old Daddy’s real poorly.”
“No need to be,” rejoined the angelic little voice. “I took my ice-cream
money and bought you a package of Bubble-Up, the fastest relief known to
the mind of a man. It is only ten cents at the nearest drugstore. Here.
Take one and drink this glass of water I brought you.” _Glug-glug.
Clink!_ “Ah-h! I’m a new man!” “Now Daddy, here’s my report card. I’m
sorry. It’s all D’s.” “Ha ha ha! Think nothing of it honey child.
Here—take this dollar. Take five dollars! Take all the other kids down
for a treat!”

“Cut!” said Dr. Simmons. “I would consider this conclusive evidence,
gentlemen, that the Spy-Eye can spot a target for bombing.”

Amid laughter and applause, the lights came on. The observers pressed
forward to shake the physicist’s hand. Colonel Simmons stood by until
the rest went to a table, where a technician was explaining the
flight-record tapes and the course and radio-band preselector
mechanisms.

“Muscles, it’s fine. Just fine! How about duplication? I know there can
be no leaks out of here, but do you think _they_ will be able to figure
it out quickly enough to get something like it into production?”

Dr. Simmons rubbed his chin. “That’s hard to say. Aside from the fuel
and magnefilm, there’s nothing new about the device except for the fact
that old components are packed into a new box. The fuel can be
duplicated, and magnefilm—well, that’s a logical development.”

“Well,” said the colonel, “it can’t matter too much. I mean, even if
they have it already. We can blanket the earth with those things. There
needn’t be a single spot on the globe unobserved. The Spy-Eye doesn’t
have to detect radio alone, does it?”

“Lord, no! It could be built to seek infrared, or radioactivity, or even
sound, though we’d have to tune the jets acoustically for that. The
magnefilm’s audio could pick our own directional beams and get a radio
fix on anything we wanted it to take pictures of. The camera could be
triggered to a time mechanism, or to anything that radiated or vibrated.
So could the hunting mechanism.”

“Oh, fine,” said the colonel again. “There’ll be no power on earth that
can’t be spotted and smashed within hours, once we get enough of these
things out.”

“No power on earth,” nodded his brother. “You have every reason to be
confident.” _And no reason to be right_, his silent voice added.

The first signs of the war to come were in all the papers. But hardly
anyone read them. They were inside, with small headings. The front pages
were more exciting that day. They screamed of new international
incidents. The tabloids were full of a photo-series of the mobbing of a
bearded man called Koronsky. (He was English—Somerset—and spoke the
buzzing brogue of his shire. His name had been Polish, three generations
before. He was wearing a beard because of scars caused by a severe
attack of barber’s itch. These facts were not touched upon.) An Estonian
student was wrapped in a U.N. banner and stoned for having sung “Ol’ Man
River” at a folk-song recital. An astonishing number of tea-leaf readers
were hired overnight by restaurants in which beef Stroganoff suddenly
became gypsy goulash.

The small notices in the papers dealt with the startling discovery by
three experimenters, one in France and two in Canada, of a new noise in
Jansky radiation, that faint hiss of jumbled radio frequencies which
originates from somewhere in interstellar space. It was a triple blast
of sound, each one two and two-fifth seconds in length, with two and
two-fifths seconds of silence between the signals. They came in groups,
three blasts each, a few fractions of a second under ten minutes apart.
The phenomenon continued for seven months, during which time careful
measurements showed an appreciable increase in amplitude. Either the
signal source was getting stronger, or it was getting nearer, said the
pundits.

During these seven months, and for longer, the Simmons brothers lapsed
into their usual “got to write to him sometime” pattern in regard to
each other. Both were busy. The colonel’s life was a continuous round of
conferences, research reports, and demonstrations, and the load on the
physicist became heavier daily, as the demands of the Board of Strategy,
stimulated by its research, its intelligence section, and the perilous
political situation, reached his laboratories.

The world was arming feverishly. A few historians and philosophers, in
their very few objective moments, found time to wonder what the
political analysis of the future would have to say about the coming war.
The First War was a war of economic attrition; the Second was too, but
it was even more an ideological war. This incipient unpleasantness had
its source in ideology, but, at the eve of hostilities, the battle of
philosophies had been relegated to the plane of philosophy. In practice,
each side—or rather, _all sides_—had streamlined themselves into
fighting machines, with each part milled to its function, and all
control centralized. The necessary process of kindling fire to fight
fire had resulted in soviets where the proletariat did not dictate, and
in democracies where the people did not rule. Indeed, since the increase
of governmental efficiency everywhere had resulted in a new high in
production of every kind, the economic and political aspects of the war
had been all but negated, and it began to appear as though the war would
be fought purely for the sake of fighting a war, and simply because the
world was prepared for it.

[]

On December 7, as if to perpetuate the memory of infamy, the first bomb
was dropped.

It was _dropped_. It wasn’t a self-guided missile. It wasn’t a planted
mine. It wasn’t dust or bio, either; it was a blast-bomb, and it was a
honey.

They got the ship that dropped it, too. A proximity-fused rocket with an
atomic warhead struck it a glancing blow. That happened, spectacularly,
over Lake Michigan. The ship, or what was left of it, crashed near
Minsk.

It was Dr. Simmons’ urgent suggestion which accounted for the ship. It
had not been seen, but it had been spotted on radar on December 6, when
it circled the earth twice. It was far inside Roche’s Limit; the
conclusion was obvious that it was self-powered. Simmons calculated its
orbit, knowing that at that velocity it could not alter its course
appreciably in the few hours it took to pass and repass any given point.
The proximity rocket was launched on schedule, not on detection.
Unfortunately, on its way to its rendezvous with fission, the ship
dropped its bomb.

And when that happened, the world drew itself together like—like—Ever
see a cat lying sleeping, spread out, relaxed and then some sound, some
movement will put that cat on guard? It may not move a muscle, but it
also isn’t relaxed any more; it isn’t asleep anymore. It has changed its
pose from a slumber to a crouch, and you know that only because of the
new shape of its eyes. The world did that.

But nobody started throwing bombs.

“Cool down, soldier-boy.”

“Cool down, he says,” fumed the colonel. “This is … this …” His words
died into a splutter.

“I know, I know,” said Dr. Simmons, trying not to grin. “You figured,
and you figured, and you read all sorts of fantastic things and
swallowed your incredulity and planned as if these things actually could
happen. You worked all practicable statistical possibilities, and a lot
more besides. And it has to start like this.”

“Everybody _knows_ Japan is neutral ground, and will stay that way.
There’s no _point_ in it!” the colonel all but wailed. “The bomb didn’t
even land on a city, or even a depot! Just knocked off the top of a
mountain in Makabe country on Honshu. There isn’t a blasted thing
there.”

“I’d say there isn’t an unblasted thing there at the moment,” chuckled
his brother. “Stop telling me how you feel and let’s have what you know.
Was the bomb traced?”

“Of course it was traced! We have recording radar all over. It came from
that ship, all right. Muscles, it was a dinky little thing, that bomb.
About like a two-hundred-fifty-pounder. But what a blossom.

“I heard the news report on it. Also seismographics. They had trouble
picking up the Hiroshima bomb. They didn’t have any with this one. It
ran about seven hundred and forty-odd times as powerful.

“Officially,” said the colonel, “it was well over nine hundred at the
source.”

“Well, well,” said Dr. Simmons, in the tone of an orchid fancier noting
red spots on a new hybrid. “Disruption, hm-m-m?”

“Disruption, and how,” rejoined the colonel. “Look, Muscles. We’ve got
disruption bombs, too—you know that. But just as a fission bomb blows
away most of its fissionable material before it can be effective, so a
disruption bomb blasts off that much more. We have bombs that make the
old Baker-Day bomb look like a wet firecracker, sure; but the best we
can do is about four hundred per cent. I thought that was plenty; but
this thing—Anyhow, Muscles, I just don’t get it. Who dropped it? Why?
Great day in the morning, man! An egg like that would’ve thrown us into
a ground-loop if it had landed on any one of our centers. No power on
earth would be that careless. To miss, I mean. On the other hand, we
can’t even be sure it wasn’t a wild throw by one of our allies.
Nowadays, you know everything, and you know nothing; you know it ahead
of time, or you know it too late.”

“My, my,” said Dr. Simmons mildly. “What about the ship?”

“The ship,” repeated the colonel, and his face reddened again. “I just
can’t believe that ship. Who built it? Where? We have everything on
earth spotted that’s worth spotting. Muscles, that thing was fifteen
hundred feet long according to the radar.”

“Anybody photograph it?”

“Apparently not. I mean, lots of radar-directed cameras shot where it
was, but it didn’t show, except as a blur.”

“How do you know it was that big, then? You know what ‘window’ does to
radar, for example. I don’t know just how, but that could be camouflage
of some sort.”

“That’s what we thought at first. Until we saw the hole in the ground
where it hit. That thing was _big!_”

“Saw it? I understand the Russians cordoned off the area and threatened
mass bombing if anyone came smelling around.”

“A thing called a Spy-Eye,” said the colonel, “with a telescopic lens—”

“Oh,” said the physicist. “Well—how much of the ship was left?”

“Not much. It exploded when it hit, of course. Apparently most of it was
vaporized over Michigan. The Spy-Eye pix show something being dug up,
though.”

“Wish I had a piece of it,” said Dr. Simmons longingly. “A thorough
quantitative analysis would very soon show where it came from.”

“We won’t get it,” said the colonel positively. “Not without the
Russkis’ cooperation anyway.”

“Could that happen?”

“Certainly not! They’re not stupid! They’ll play this thing for all it’s
worth. If they can figure out where it came from, they’ll know and we
won’t—one up for them in the war of nerves. If they can’t, and the
sample’s worthless to them, we can’t know it until we try, and we want
to try. So they’ll hold out for some concession or other. Whatever it is
will cost us plenty.”

“Leroy,” said the physicist slowly, “have you heard about the so-called
signals in the Jansky bands?”

“I know what you’re driving at,” snorted the colonel. “The answer is no.
But really, _no_. That’s no ship from outer space. We fixed on these
signals months ago, and had even the 200-incher and a whole battery of
image orthicons on the indicated direction. The signal strength
increased, but nothing could be seen.”

“Uh-huh. And when it arrived, it couldn’t be photographed.”

“It—Oh. Oh-oh!”

“Well, you said yourself that if it had been built anywhere on Earth
you’d have known it.”

“Your phone,” gasped the colonel. “I’ve got to find about those Jansky
signals.” He rushed to the corner of the room.

“They stopped,” said the doctor. “Yes, Leroy. I’ve been following them
all along. They cut out when we shelled the ship.”

“Th-they did?”

“Yup.”

“Well—that takes care of that, doesn’t it? Even if it was something from
outside—”

“Now,” said Dr. Simmons relentlessly, “with that racket off the Jansky
bands, it’s possible to hear the new noises.”

“New—”

“Three sets of ’em. By their amplitude, I’d judge that they’re scheduled
to be here in two, three, and five months respectively.” The colonel
gasped. “I think,” added Dr. Simmons calmly, “that they’re approaching
faster than the first one.”

“That can’t be!” bellowed the colonel. “Haven’t we enough to watch
without fighting a Buck Rogers war as well? We just can’t fight our own
war and these invaders, too!”

“Come on,” said Dr. Simmons gently. “Why not take it up with the Board,
Leroy? They’re ready for everything. You told me so yourself.”

The colonel glared at him. “This is no time to needle me, Muscles,” he
growled. “What do you think’s going to happen?”

The scientist considered. “Well, what do you think would happen if you
sent out, say, a plane to investigate an island? The plane circles it a
couple of times, and then without warning gets shot down. What would you
do?”

“Send a squadron and bomb the—” He fell silent.

“Yes, Leroy.”

“But—they dropped the bomb first!”

“How do you know what they were doing? Put it on other terms; you are
walking in the woods and you come to a mound of dry earth. You wonder
what it is. You stick a piece of wood into it.” He shrugged. “Maybe it’s
an ant hill. It would seem to me that an atomic bomb would be an
excellent method to get a quick idea of the elemental composition of a
strange planet. There’re all kinds of light from the disruption, you
know. Screen off what radiation you can expect from your own bomb, and
what’s left will give you a pretty fair spectral analysis of the
target.”

“But they must have known the planet was inhabited. What right had they
to bomb it?”

“Did the bomb do any damage?”

The colonel was silent.

“And yet we shot the ship down. Leroy, you can’t expect them to like
it.”

The soldier looked up suddenly, narrowly at his brother. “It was your
idea to shoot it down.”

“It was not!” Dr. Simmons snapped. “I was asked how it could be done,
and I said how it could be done. That was all. The order was given by
some eager lad in your Board, if anyone.” He made an impatient gesture.
“That’s beside the point, Leroy. We can come out of our caves in the
brave new postwar world and fix the blame to our hearts’ content. Our
problem at the moment is what to do when the next contingent arrives. I
rather think they’ll be loaded for bear. That was, you say, a big ship,
and what it dropped was a small bomb. You can guess what will happen if
three ships drop a few whole sticks of bombs like that—say a thousand of
them.”

“Three hundred would be enough to make this planet look like the moon,”
said the colonel whitely.

“I remember a lecture, long ago,” said Dr. Simmons reminiscently, “by a
man named Dr. Szilard. Someone asked him if there was any conceivable
defense against the atomic bomb. He laughed and said, ‘Certainly. The
Japanese discovered it in eight days.’ ”

“A defense? Oh. They surrendered.”

“That’s right. That stopped the bombs from coming over.”

“How do you surrender to a force you can’t communicate with?”

“Perhaps we can. We can try. But from their point of view we attacked
first, and in all probability they’ll hit first and talk later. You
would.”

“Yes,” admitted the colonel. “I would. The thing to do, Muscles, is to
try to organize some defense.”

“With the world in the state it’s in now? Don’t be silly. There might be
a chance if everyone believed, if every nation would cooperate. But if
nobody trusts anybody—”

The colonel bolted to the door. “We’ll have to do what we can. So long,
Muscles. I’ll keep you posted—What in blazes are you grinning for?”

“Don’t mind me, please,” said Dr. Simmons, half laughing. “It’s
nothing.”

“Tell me what your nothing is so I can get to work with a clear mind,”
said the colonel irritably.

“Well, it’s just that I’ve been expecting the well-known atomic doom for
so _very_ long, that I’ve covered every emotion but one over it. I’ve
been afraid, even terrified. I’ve been angry. I’ve been disgusted. And
now—it’s funny. It’s funny because of what you’re going through. Of all
the things you’ve guessed at, trained for, planned for—it has to come
like this. Sitting ducks. An enemy you can’t outthink, outweigh,
outsmart, or terrorize. It was always inevitable; now even a soldier can
see it.”

“Very funny,” growled the colonel, jamming his hat down. “Out of this
world.”

“Hey!” called the physicist. “That was good!”

Laughing, he went to his inner laboratory, the one where no one else
ever went.

Their next contact was by telephone. Too much time had passed; at least,
Dr. Simmons thought it was too much time. After he had determined to
call his brother, it occurred to him that he did not know exactly how to
go about it, so he called the War Department in Washington. It took two
minutes and forty seconds to make the contact; but the doctor heard the
Washington operator, the Chicago operator, the Denver operator, the
Gunnison operator, the Gunnison mobile operator, and an operations
lieutenant passing along something called a crash pri. Dr. Simmons
raised his eyebrows at this, and never forgot it.

“Hi, Muscles.”

“Hello, Leroy. Listen. What’s with the salvage situation? I want to do
that analysis.”

“The stinkers!” the colonel said heatedly. “They made a proposition. I
turned ’em down. The Board backed me up.”

“What was the proposition?”

“They wouldn’t send a sample. They said if we had someone who could
perform a definitive analysis, to send him to Russia.”

“Aha! Mountain to Mahomet, eh? Why did you refuse?”

“Don’t be silly! There are maybe a half-dozen men in this country who
might be able to make a really exhaustive analysis, and come up with a
reliable conclusion. And about five of ’em, we can’t be sure.”

“Send the other one, then.”

“That’s you, egghead. We’re not going to run a risk like that.”

“Why not?”

“They could use you, Muscles.”

“I couldn’t use anything they could give me.”

“That isn’t the point,” the colonel assured him. “But they have ways—”

“Knock off the dramatics, Leroy. This isn’t a grade-B movie. And there
isn’t time for fooling around. We have maybe six weeks.”

There was a silence. Then, “Only six weeks?”

“That’s right,” said the doctor positively. “Tell you what. Make
arrangements to get me to Minsk right away, and let me get on that
analysis. At worst we can find out what the ship was made of, and get an
idea of how advanced those people are. At the very best, we might find a
defense. Tell the Russians that my work will be open and aboveboard.
They can put on as many observers as they want to, and I will share my
findings completely with them.”

“You can’t do that! That’s just what we want to avoid!”

It was the physicist’s turn to fall silent. _How do you like that!_ he
thought. _The Board is clinging to some faint hope that the invaders
will do their dirty work for them. They think that we’ll find a defense
and no one else will_. He said finally, speaking slowly and carefully as
if to a child, “Leroy, listen. I’m just as anxious as you are to do
something about this matter. I think I can do something. But either I do
it my way, or I don’t do it at all. Is that quite clear? Perhaps I’m
more resigned than you are. Perhaps I think we deserve this … are you
there?”

“Yes.” The doctor knew his brother had paused to lick his lips
nervously. “You really think you can get something of value out of the
analysis?”

“Almost certainly.”

“I’ll check with the Board. Muscles—”

“Yes, Leroy.”

“Don’t go mystic on us, hah?”

“Go see the Board,” said Dr. Simmons, and hung up.

He went to Russia.

The colonel met him on his return, two weeks later, at a West Coast
field. The unarmed long-range jet fighter and its bristling escort,
which had accompanied it from Eniwetok, skimmed to the landing strip.
The colonel had a two-place coupé sport plane waiting. Dr. Simmons,
inordinately cheerful, refused a meal and said he wanted to take off
right away for his laboratories. The colonel wanted him to appear before
the Board for a report, but he smiled and shook his head, and the
colonel knew that smile better than to argue.

When they reached traveling altitude, and the colonel had throttled down
to stay under the sonic barrier, and they had the susurrus of driving
jets to accompany them rather than the roar of climbing jets to compete,
they talked.

“How was it, Muscles?”

“I had a ball. It was _fine_.”

The colonel shot a look at him. _He disapproves_, thought the doctor.
_War is grim and businesslike, and for anyone to enjoy the business of
war seems to him a sacrilege_.

“It looked pretty touchy at first. They all acted as if I had an A-bomb
in my watch pocket. Then I ran into Iggy.”

“Iggy?”

“Yup. I could recite his whole name if I tried hard, but it’s a
jawbreaker. We used to drink forbidden sherry together in the dorm at
the University of Virginia when I was a kid in school. We thrashed out
all the truths of the cosmos together. He was a swell guy. I remember
once when Iggy decided that the rule forbidding women in the dorm was
unreasonable. He rigged up a—”

“What happened in Minsk?” asked the colonel coldly.

“Oh. Minsk. Well, Iggy’s come a long way since college. He specialized
in aerodynamics, and then got tired of it. For years he’d been fooling
around with nuclear physics as a hobby, and during the Second War he got
real high up in the field. Naturally he was called in when this ship
nosed in at Minsk.”

“Why naturally?”

“Well, the fragment retained much of its shape. That’s aerodynamics. And
it was hot—really hot. That’s nuclear physics. He was a big help.
According to his extrapolations, by the way, your radar was right. If
that was part of the hull, as it probably was, and if was a more or less
continuous curve, then the ship must’ve been all of fifteen hundred feet
long, with a four-hundred-foot cross-section at max. Quite a piece of
business.”

“I can’t say I’m happy to hear about it. Go on.”

“Well, the high brass there apparently expected me to smell the
fragment, taste it, and come up with a trade name. There was a lot of
pressure to keep me away from testing equipment, if any. That’s where
Iggy came in. He apologized for my carelessness in not bringing my
betatron and some distillation apparatus. They saw the point and got me
to a laboratory. They have some nice stuff.” He shook his head
appreciatively.

Eagerly the colonel asked: “Anything we haven’t got? Can we duplicate
any of it? Where is this place? Did you see any defenses?”

“They have lots of stuff,” said the doctor shortly. “Do you want me to
finish? You do? All right. Well, we volatilized pieces of it, and we
distilled it. We subjected it to reagents and reducers and stress
analyses and crystallographic tests. We put it in magnetic fields and we
tested its resistance and conductivity. We got plenty of figures on it.”
He laughed. Again the colonel looked impatiently at him.

“Well, what is the stuff?”

“There is no name for it, yet. Iggy wants to call it _nichevite_—in
other words, ‘never mind.’ Leroy, it looks like dural, only it’s harder
and it’s tougher. But it oxidizes very easily. It’s metallic, but it has
such a low conductivity that it makes like porcelain. It has
heavy-isotope aluminum in it, and light copper, and it isn’t an alloy.
It’s a compound. It’s a blasted chemical compound, very stable, made of
nothing but elements with a positive valence. It’s stronger than any
steel, and can withstand temperatures so high that you can forget about
them. The atomic blast broke it; it didn’t fuse it. We volatilized it
only by powdering it and oxidizing it in an electric furnace, and then
subtracting the oxygen from our calculations. That got us near enough to
where we wanted to go. One thing is certain: no place on Earth you ever
heard about was the source of that stuff. Iggy has sworn to his bunch
that the material is of extra-solar origin. They’re propagandizing it in
Russia now. A good thing, too. The Russians were all ready to call the
whole thing a Yankee trick.”

“I’ve heard some of those broadcasts,” said the colonel. “I was hoping
we could keep that information to ourselves.”

“Don’t be childish,” said the physicist, in as abrupt a tone as he ever
used. “We’re not out on maneuvers, sonny. Time and time again one person
or another has told the world to wake up to reality. This once the world
will wake up or else. You won’t be able to keep it asleep any more. It’s
gone too far.”

The threat from outside finally broke in the papers, but only after long
and worried conferences in governmental and military headquarters all
over the world. The simple fact that the world would work together or
face extinction made, at first, as much impression as it ever had—very
little. It was not enough to overcome man’s distrust of himself. Not at
first.

But the die-hards yielded, gradually and with misgivings, and acquainted
the people with the menace that faced them. There was little dangerous
panic—controls were too tight to allow for it—but after the first thrill
of excitement there came a unanimous demand for a plan of action which
was too powerful to ignore.

Bulletins were posted hourly on the amplitude of the Jansky signals. As
Dr. Simmons had pointed out, there were three sets of them, and it
became increasingly evident that the three sources were in V formation,
and coming fast—much faster than the first one had.

“They’ll box us,” said Colonel Simmons. “There won’t be any circling
this time. They’ll take up equidistant positions around the planet, out
of our range, and they’ll fire at will.”

“I think you’re right,” said his brother. “Well, that gives us two kinds
of defense. They’re both puny, but it’ll be the best we can do. One’s
technological, of course. I don’t know exactly which direction would be
the best to take. We can build ships ourselves, and attack them in
space. We can try to develop some kind of shield against their bombs, or
whatever else they use against us. And we can try to build seeking
torpedoes of some sort that’ll go out and get ’em—bearing in mind that
we might be out there ourselves sometime soon, and we don’t want to fall
prey to our own weapons.”

“What’s the other defense?”

“Sociological. In the first place, we must decentralize to a degree
heretofore impossible. In the second place, we must pool our brains and
our physical resources. No nation can afford to foot the bill of this
kind of production; no nation can afford to take the chance of
by-passing some foreign brain which might help the whole world. Leroy,
stop puckering up like that! You look as if you’re going to cry. I know
what’s bothering you. This looks like the end of professional
militarism. Well, it is, in the national sense. But you have a bigger
enemy than ever before, and one more worthy of the best efforts of
humanity. You and your Board have been doing what seemed to be really
large thinking. It wasn’t, because its field was too small and too
detailed. But now you have something worth fighting. Now your plans can
be planetary—galactic—cosmic, if you like. Don’t hanker after the past,
soldier-boy. That attitude’s about the only way there is to stay small.”

“That’s quite a speech,” said the colonel. “I … wish I could argue with
it. If I admit you’re right, I can only admit that there is no solution
at all. I don’t believe the world will ever realize the necessity for
cooperation until it’s too late.”

“Maybe it will. Maybe. I remember once talking to an old soldier who had
been in the First War. In his toolshed he had a little trench shovel
about eighteen inches long—a very flimsy piece of equipment it was. I
remarked on it, and asked him what earthly good it was to a soldier. He
laughed and said that when a green squad was deployed near no man’s land
and ordered to dig in, they gabbled and griped and scratched and stewed
over the job. And when the first enemy bullets came whining over, they
took their little shovels and they just _melted_ into the ground.” He
chuckled. “Maybe it’ll be like that. Who knows? Anyway, do what you can,
Leroy.”

“You have the strangest sense of humor,” growled the colonel, and left.

They came.

The first was just a shape against the stars. It could be heard like a
monster’s breath in a dark place: _wsh-h-h-t wsh-h-h-t wsh-h-h-t_ on the
sixty-megacycle band, where before nothing had been heard but the
meaningless hiss of the Jansky noise. But it could not be seen. Not
really. It was just a shape. A blur. It did not reflect radar impulses
very well; the response was indeterminate, but indicated that it was
about the size and shape of the mysterious bomber which had dealt the
first terrifying, harmless blow.

The world went crazy, but it was a directed madness. With the appearance
of the Outsider, all talk of the advisability of defense ceased. There
could be no discussion of priorities.

A Curie Institute scientist announced light-metal fission. A Hungarian
broke his own security regulations with the announcement of an
artificial element of heretofore unthinkable density which could be cast
into fission chambers, making possible the long-awaited pint-sized
atomic engine. A Russian scientist got what seemed to be a toehold on
antigravity and set up a yell which resulted in a conclave of big brains
in Denver—men from all over the world. He was wrong, but a valuable
precedent was set. A World Trade Organization was established, with
control of raw materials and manufactured goods and their routes and
schedules. Its control was so complete that tariffs were suspended _in
toto_—the regulation read “for the duration”—and, since it is efficient
to give a square deal, a square deal was given in such a clear-cut
fashion that objectors were profiteers by definition. Russian ores began
appearing in British smelters, and Saar coal was loaded into the
Bessemers of Birmingham. Most important of all, a true International
Police Force came into being with hardly a labor pain. Its members were
free to go everywhere, and their duty was to stop anything which got in
the way of planetary production. Individual injustice, faulty diet, poor
housing, underpaying, and such items fell immediately into this
category, and were dealt with quickly and with great authority.

Propaganda unified itself and came to a focus in the hourly bulletins
about the Outsiders. Every radio station on Earth included that dread
triple hiss in its station breaks.

And the Outsider stayed just where it was, just lay there, breathing,
waiting for its two cohorts.

“It’s makeshift,” said Dr. Simmons, “but it might do. It just might do.”

The colonel stepped past him and looked at the cradle, on which rested a
tubby, forty-foot object like a miniature submarine.

“A satellite, you said?”

“Uh-huh. Loaded to the gills with direction-finders and small atomic
rockets. It’ll keep a continuous fix on the Outsider during its transit,
and relay information to monitor stations on Earth. If one of the ships
fires a torpedo, it will be detected and reported immediately and the
satellite will launch an interceptor rocket. If the bomb or torpedo
dodges, the interceptor will follow it. In the meantime, big
interceptors can be on their way from Earth. If a torpedo comes close to
the satellite, the satellite will dodge. If it comes too close, the
satellite will explode violently enough to take the torp with it. We
plan to set out three layers of these things, nine in each stratum,
twenty-seven in all, so spaced as to keep a constant scanning in every
direction.”

“Satellites, hm-m-m? Muscles, if we can do this, why can’t we go right
out there and get the ships themselves?”

The physicist ticked the reasons off on his fingers. “First, because if
they bracket us, as in every likelihood they will, they’d be foolish to
come any closer than the one that’s already here, and he’s out of any
range we can handle just now. We can assume that his ships, if not his
bombs, will be prepared against our proximity devices. We’ll try, of
course, but I wouldn’t be too hopeful. Second, we still haven’t a fuel
efficient enough to allow for escape velocity maneuvers without a deadly
acceleration, so our chances of sending manned rockets up for combat are
nil at the moment.”

The colonel looked admiringly at the satellite and the crowd of
technicians which swarmed around it. “I knew we’d come up with
something.”

His brother gave him a quizzical glance. “I don’t know if you fully
realize just how big a ‘we’ that is you just used. The casing of that
satellite is Swedish steel. The drive is a German scientist’s adaptation
of the Hungarian baby fission engine. The radio circuits are American,
except for the scanning relay, which is Russian. And those
technicians—I’ve never seen such a bunch. Davis, Li San, Abdallah,
Schechter, O’Shaughnessy—he comes from Bolivia, by the way, and speaks
only Spanish—Yokamatsu, Willet, Van Cleve. All of these men, all these
designs and materials, and all the money that make up these satellites,
have been found and assembled from all over the earth in only the last
few weeks. There were miracles of production during the Second War,
Leroy, but nothing to match this.”

The colonel shook his head dazedly. “I never thought I’d see it happen.”

“You’ll see more surprising things than this before we’re done,” said
the scientist happily. “Now I’ve got to get back to work.”

That was the week the second Outsider arrived. It took up a position in
the celestial south, not quite opposing its fellow, and it lay quietly,
breathing. If there was converse between them, it was not detectable by
any known receiver. It was the same apparent size and had the same
puzzling effect on radar and photographic plates as its predecessors.

In Pakistan, an unfueled airplane took off from a back-country airstrip,
flew to twenty thousand feet, and came in for a landing. The projector
which was trained on it had no effect on the approaching aircraft in the
moment it took the plane to disappear behind a hillock and reappear on
the other side. There was a consequent momentary power loss, and the
plane lost too much altitude and had to make another pass. The wind
direction dictated a climbing turn to the north, and the beam from the
projector briefly touched the antenna of an amateur radio operator
called Ben Ali Ra. Ben Ali Ra’s rig exploded with great enthusiasm,
filling the inside of his shack with spots and specks of fused metal,
ceramic, and glass. Fortunately for him—and for the world—he was in the
adjoining room at the time, and suffered only a deep burn in his thigh,
which was struck by a flying fragment of a coil-form.

This was the first practical emergence of broadcast power.

Ben Ali was aware of the nature of the experiments at the nearby field,
having eavesdropped by radio on some field conversations. He was also
aware of certain aims and attitudes held by the local authority. Defying
these, he left the area that night, on foot, knowing that he would be
killed if captured, knowing that in any event his personal property
would be confiscated, and in great pain because of his wound. His story
is told elsewhere; however, he reached Benares and retained
consciousness long enough to warn the International Police.

The issue was not that broadcast power was a menace; it had a long way
to go before it could be used without shouting its presence through
every loudspeaker within miles. The thing that brought the I.P. down in
force on this isolated, all but autonomous speck on the map was the
charge that the inventors intended to keep their development to
themselves. The attachment of the device and all related papers by the
Planetary Defense Organization was a milestone of legal precedent, and
brought a new definition of “eminent domain.” Thereafter no delays were
caused by the necessity of application to local governments for the
release of defense information; the I.P. investigated, confiscated, and
turned the devices in question over to the Planetary Defense
Organization, acting directly and paying fairly all parties involved. So
another important step was taken toward the erasure of national lines.

Two weeks before the arrival of the third Outsider—excluding the one
which had been shot down—the last of the twenty-seven satellites took up
its orbit, and the world enjoyed its first easy breath since the
beginning of the Attack, as it was called.

Because of high-efficiency circuits and components, the fuel consumption
of the electronic set-up in the satellites was very small. They held
their orbits without power, except for an occasional automatic
correction-kick. They could operate without servicing for years. It was
assumed that by the time they needed servicing, astrogation would have
developed to the point where they could be refueled—and recharged—by
man-carrying ships. If technology did not solve the problem, little harm
could be done by the silent, circling machines; when, at long last, they
slipped from their arbitrary orbits and spiraled in to crash, so many
years would have passed that the question was, momently, academic.

And even before the twenty-seventh satellite was launched, factories
were retooling for a long dreamed of project, a space station which
would circle the Earth in an orbit close enough to be reached by
man-carrying rockets, which would rest and refuel there and take off
again for deep space without the crushing drag of Earth’s gravity.

The third Outsider took up its position, as Dr. Simmons had prophesied,
equidistant from the others with Earth in the center, rolling nakedly
under them. As in the case of the arrivals of the other two, there was
no sign of its presence but the increasing sound on the sixty-megacycle
band. Radar failed utterly to locate it until, suddenly, it was in its
position—a third blur against the distant stars, a third indeterminate,
fifteen-hundred-foot shape on the radarscopes.

The Board of Strategy was happily, almost gleefully, busy again. Their
earlier work within the field of the probability of human works faded to
insignificance against the probabilities inherent in the Attack. There
was another major difference, too: they came out in the open. They
plastered the world with warnings, cautions, and notices, many of them
with no more backing than vivid imaginings of some early science-fiction
writer—plus probability. Although logic indicated that the first blows
would be in the form of self-guided missiles, thousands of other
possibilities were considered. Spy rays, for example; radio hams the
world over were asked to keep winding coils, keep searching the spectrum
for any unusual frequencies. Telepathic amplifiers, for another example;
asylums were circularized for any radical changes in the quality and
quantity of insanity and even abnormal conduct. The literary critics
were called in to watch for any trends in creative writing which seemed
to have an inhuman content. Music was watched the same way, as were the
graphic arts. Farmers and fire wardens were urgently counseled to watch
for any plant life, particularly predatory or prehensile or drug-bearing
plant life, which might develop. Sociologists were dragged from their
almost drunken surveys of this remarkable turn of social evolution, and
were ordered right back into it again, to try to extrapolate something
harmful to come from this functional, logical, unified planet. But only
the nationalists found harm, and they were—well, unfashionable.

The bombs came about a month after the third Outsider took up his post.

The whole world watched. Everything stopped. Every television screen
pictured radarscopes and the whip-voiced announcer at Planetary Defense
Central in Geneva, which had at long last regained its place as a world
center.

The images showed Outsiders A, B, and C in rapid succession. So well
synchronized was the action that the three images could have been
superimposed, and would have seemed like one picture. Each ship launched
two bombs; of each two, one turned lazily toward Earth and the other
hovered.

“Out of range of the satellites,” said the announcer. “We shall have to
wait. The satellites will detect the bombs when they are within two
hundred miles, and will then launch their interceptors. Our Earth-based
rockets are aiming now.”

There was a forty-minute wait. Neighbor called neighbor; illuminated
news banners on the sides of buildings gave the dreaded news. Buses and
trains stopped while their passengers and crews flocked to televisors.
There was a hushed tension, world-wide.

“_Flash!_ Satellite 24 has released an interceptor. Stand by; perhaps we
can get a recording of the scanner … one moment please … _Anything from
Monitor 24b yet, Jim? On the air now? Check … _Ladies and gentlemen, if
you can be patient a moment—we are recording pictures of the radarscope
at Monitor 24b in Lhasa. It will be only a few … here it is now.”

Flickering at first, then clearing, came the Lhasa picture. The monitor
station there kept a fix on Satellite 24 from horizon to horizon, as did
the satellite’s other two stations in San Francisco and Madrid. The
picture showed the familiar lines of the satellite. Abruptly a short,
thick tube began to protrude from the hull. When extended about eight
feet, it swung over about forty degrees on its ball-and-socket base.
From its tip shot a small cylinder; there was a brief flicker of jets.
“The interceptor,” said the loudspeakers unnecessarily.

The scene flashed to the Earth-based interceptor station at White Sands.
A huge rocket mounted with deceptive slowness, balanced on a towering
column of flame, and disappeared into the sky.

Then, bewilderingly, the scene was repeated for Monitor Stations 22c and
25a, as their satellites sensed the bombs coming from Outsiders B and C.
White Sands sent two more giant rockets up as fast they could set the
seeking gear.

Then, after an interminable four hours, came the picture which was to
stand forever as the high point in newsreel coverage. It was the image
picked up from the relaying television camera in the nose of Satellite
24’s little interceptor.

It fixed the image of the Outsider’s bomb, and it would not let go. The
bomb, at first only a speck, increased in size alarmingly. It was a
perfect cylinder, seen in perspective. There was nothing streamlined
about it. It was quite featureless except for a strange indistinction
around one end, as if it were not in focus. It was like a small patch of
the substance of the Outsiders themselves.

The image grew. It filled the screen—

And then there was nothing.

But cameras all over Europe picked up and relayed the image of that
awe-inspiring explosion. Silently a ball of light appeared in the sky,
expanding, flickering through the entire spectrum, sending out a wheel
of blue and silver rays. It lasted for a full fifteen seconds, growing
in size and in brilliance, before it began to fade, and it left a pastel
ghost of itself for a minute afterward. Speckles of random radiation
cluttered the screens then, and there were no more actual pictures of
the action.

The entire world gave a concerted shout of joy. In dozens of languages
and dialects, the fierce, triumphant sound roared skyward. _Got one!_
And the bells and whistles picked up the cry, frightening sleeping
birds, sending crocodiles scuttling off river banks, waking children all
over the world. It was like a thousand New Year’s Eves, simultaneously.

What happened next happened quickly.

A White Sands rocket got the second bomb. For some reason there was no
atomic explosion. Perhaps the proximity gear failed. Perhaps it was
neutralized, though that would seem impossible, since the seeking gear
obviously did not fail. It was not as spectacular as the first
interception, but it was quite as effective. The purely physical impact
as the huge interceptor struck the tiny bomb all but pulverized them
both.

The third bomb breezed past its satellite interceptor, its White Sands
interceptor, and a second-stratum satellite. It was observed that on
getting within range of the seeking radar of each of these it became
enveloped in the misty, coruscating field which characterized the
Outsider ships. Apparently this field completely confused the radar; it
was as if the radar detected it but didn’t know what to do with it—“the
same spot we were in a year ago,” as Doctor Simmons remarked tersely.

The bomb entered the atmosphere—and burned up like a meteor.

Then it was that the most incredible thing of all happened. The three
hovering bombs—one beside each Outsider—slowly retreated toward the
parent vessels, as if being reeled in.

_They recalled their bombs_.

Thereafter they lay quietly, the three Outsiders. The did not move, they
made no move. They gasped their triple pantings, and they filled
thousands of photographic plates with their indeterminate muzziness, and
that was all.

Four giant rockets out of the five sent after the invaders missed their
mark completely. The fifth, which was equipped with an ingenious seeking
device based on correlation of its target with an actual photographic
transparency of the target, apparently struck Outsider B. There was a
splendid atomic display, and again the world went mad with joy.

But when the area could be observed again, Outsider B was still there.
And there it stayed. There they all stayed.

A cyclic, stiffly controlled panic afflicted the world; as a sense of
impending doom was covered by humanity’s classic inability to fix its
attention for very long to any one thing, the panic alternated to
reactive terror, swung away from terror again because life must go on,
because you must eat and he must love and they must make a bet on the
World Series.…

Seven months passed.

Dr. Simmons plodded into his private office and shut the door. He was
tired—much more tired than in the days earlier that year, when he was
working an eighteen-hour day. _The more a man does, the more he can do_,
he reflected wearily, _until the optimum is reached; and the optimum is
way up yonder, if he cares about what he’s doing_. He sat down at his
desk and leaned back. _And if he takes just as much care as ever, but
there just isn’t as much to do, he gets tired. He gets very, very
tired …_

He palmed his face, blinked his eyes, sighed, and leaning forward,
flipped the annunciator switch. His night secretary said brightly: “Yes,
Doctor?”

“Don’t let anything or anybody in here for two hours. And take care of
that cold.”

“Yes, sir. Thank you, Doctor, I will.”

_A good kid_.… He rose and went to the washroom which adjoined his
office. Stepping into the shower stall, he lifted up the soap dish,
which had a concealed hinge, and pressed a stud under it. He counted off
four seconds, released the stud, and pulled on the hot water faucet. The
back wall of the shower swung toward him. He stepped through into his
own private laboratory—the one where no one else ever went.

He kicked the door closed behind him and looked around. _I almost wish I
could do it all over again. The things that have happened here, the
dreams …_

His thought cut out in a sudden, numbing shock.

“What are you doing here?”

The intruder accepted the question, turned it over, altered it, and gave
it back. “What have _you_ been doing here?” rasped the colonel.

The physicist sank into an easy-chair and gaped at his brother. His
pulse was pounding, and for a moment his cheek twitched. “Just give me a
second,” he said wryly. “This is a little like finding someone in your
bed.” He took out a handkerchief and touched his dry lips with it. “How
did you get in here?”

Leroy Simmons was sitting behind a worktable. He had his hat, with its
polished visor, in the crook of his arm, and his buttons were brilliant.
He looked as if he were sitting for a particular kind of portrait. The
doctor jumped up. “You’ve _got_ to have a drink!” he said emphatically.

The colonel put his hat on the table and leaned forward. The act
wrinkled his tunic and showed up his bald spot. “What’s the matter with
you, Muscles?”

The doctor shook his head. _He doesn’t look like a man of distinction
any more_, he thought regretfully. “I feel a little better now,” he
said. “What brings you here, Leroy?”

“I’ve been watching you for months,” said the colonel. “I’ve had to do
it all myself. This is … it’s too big.” He looked completely miserable.
“I followed you and watched you and checked up on you. I took
measurements all around these offices, and located this room. I was in
here a dozen times, looking for the gimmick on the door.”

“Oh, yes. Always dropping around to see me when I wasn’t around, and
saying you’d wait. My secretary told me.”

“Her!” The syllable was eloquent. “She’s no help. I never saw anyone
harder to get information from.”

“It’s an unbeatable combination in a secretary,” he grinned. “Infinite
tact, and no facts. She’s not in it, Leroy. No one is.”

“No one but you. I notice you’re not denying anything.”

The doctor sighed. “You haven’t charged me with anything yet. Suppose
you tell me what you know, or what you think you know.”

The colonel took a somber-backed little notebook out of his pocket. “I
have no associates,” he said grimly, “either. It’s all in here. Some of
it is Greek to me, but some I understand—worse luck. I wish I didn’t.
You have something to do with the Outsiders, don’t you?”

His brother looked at him for a long moment, and then nodded, as if he
had asked and answered a question.

“Yes.”

“You know where they come from, what they’re going to do, how they
operate—everything about them?”

“That’s right.”

“They have given you—information. They have given you a way to”—he
referred to the book, his lips moving as he read; they always
had—“expand and concentrate binding energy into a self-sustaining
field.”

“No.”

“No? You have all the formulas. You wrote thousands of pages of notes on
the subject. Your diary mentions it repeatedly—and as if it was an
accomplished fact.”

“It is. I didn’t get it from the Outsiders. They got it from me.”

There was a jolting silence. The colonel turned quite white.
“That … does … it,” he whispered. “I knew you were in contact with the
enemy, Muscles. I tried my best to believe that you were simply working
them for information, so that we could use it against them. A risky
game, and you were playing it alone. After I went through your papers
here, I just couldn’t believe it any more. You seemed to be working
along with them. And now you tell me that you are actually supplying
them with devices we haven’t got!”

The scientist nodded gravely.

The colonel’s hand, under the table, moved to his wrist. He touched a
button on the small transmitter there, and pulled a slide over.

Dr. Simmons said thickly, “Leroy. Would you mind telling me how you got
on to this?”

“I’ll tell you, all right. It started with a routine check-up of
supplies and equipment into these laboratories, for auditing purposes.
No production is run without cost accounting, even by the government.
Even by a planetary one. It was brought to my attention that certain
things came in here that apparently never went out. When I went over the
reports and saw they were correct, I wrote a memo which cleared you
completely on my authority, and I killed the investigation. I—picked it
up myself.”

“Good heavens, why?”

“If I found anything,” the colonel said with difficulty, “I wanted to
take care of it myself.”

“Sort of keep the family name sweet and clean?”

“Not that. You’re too clever. You always were. I … I’ll tell you
something. I was appointed to the Board because of you. I never could
have made it otherwise. The Board figured I’d be an intimate link with
you; that I could see you any time, when no one else could.”

_Of course I knew that_, thought the doctor. “I didn’t know that,” he
said. “I don’t believe you.”

“Oh, cut it out,” said the colonel. “You played me for a sucker all
along, and through me, the Board.”

_Correct again_, the physicist thought. He said: “Nonsense, Leroy. I
just withheld information from time to time.”

“You gave us tips,” said the colonel bitterly. “You sent us off on goose
chase after goose chase. And we pushed the whole world around the way
you wanted us to.”

_The boy’s real sharp tonight_, thought Dr. Simmons, and added to
himself, _He’s such a swell, sincere character. I hate to see him go
through all this_. “And why does all this make you squelch the Board’s
investigation and pick it up yourself?”

“I know how slick you are,” said the colonel doggedly. “You just might
talk a jury or a court-martial out of shooting you. I don’t see how you
could, but I don’t see how you could have done any of this either.” He
waved a hand around the secret lab. “You won’t talk your way out of it
with me.”

“You’re my judge, then, my jury. My executioner, too?”

“I’m … your brother,” said the colonel in a low voice, “and, like
always, I want you to get what you deserve.”

“I could puddle up and bawl like a baby,” said Dr. Simmons suddenly,
warmly. “Let’s stop playing around, Leroy, and I’ll tell you the whole
story.”

“Is it true you’ve been working with the Outsiders?”

“Yes, you idiot!”

The colonel slumped back and said glumly: “Then that settles it. Go
ahead and talk if you want to. It can’t make any difference now.” He
looked at his watch.

The scientist rose and went to a wall panel, which he pulled out,
revealing a compact tape-recording outfit. From a rack above it he
selected a reel, set it on the peg, and drew the end of the tape into
the self-threader. Without switching on, he returned to his chair.

“Just a couple of preliminaries, Leroy, and then you can have the whole
story. I have done what I have done because of what you used to call
‘dewy-eyed idealism.’ It has worked. We live now in a unified world. It
must remain unified until the threat of the Outsiders is done with; it
has no alternative. I don’t think that the Outsiders will be removed for
a while yet, and the longer the world lives this way, the harder it will
be for it to go back to the old cut-up, mixed-up way of life it has
followed for the last fifteen thousand years or so.

“I’ll tell you what will happen from now on. The space station will be
completed and put into action. When the point of boredom is reached with
that, new fuel will be developed. Shortly afterward, the three Outsiders
will put out their hovering bombs again. It’ll throw the world into a
panic, but with the station and the new fuel and the whole world working
at it, a fighting ship will leave the station—outbound.

“It will sling some torps at the Outsiders, and they won’t go off, or
they’ll miss, or they’ll explode prematurely. The Outsiders won’t hit
back. The warship will move in close, and when it gets close enough to
do real damage, it will get a message.

“This message will be broadcast on the three most likely frequencies,
and signals will go out all over the other bands advertising those three
frequencies. The message will start like this: ‘Stop and listen. This is
the Outsider.’ This will be repeated in English, French, Spanish,
German, Arabic, and, for good measure, Esperanto. This is the message.”

He rose again, put his hand on the switch, smiled, and turned to face
the colonel. “Funny … this was designed only to speak to the future. And
you’re the first to hear it.”

“Why is that funny?”

“You’re the past.” He flipped the switch. “You’ll pardon the tone of
it,” he said gently. “I had a chance to make a deep purple oration, and
I find I ramble on like an old lady over her knitting.”

_“You?”_

“Me. The Outsider. Listen.”

This is the message, as it came from the tape in Dr. Simmons’ leisurely
mellow voice.

I am the Outsider. Do not fear me. There will be no battle. I am your
friend. Hear me out.

I am four ships and a noise in the Jansky radiations. The ships are not
ships, and they came from Earth, not from outside. The Jansky signals do
not come from the stars. Listen.

I am one man, one man only, without helpers, without any collaborators,
except possibly thinkers—a little Thoreau, a little Henry George, maybe
a smattering of H.G. Wells … you can believe me. Archimedes once said,
“Give me a lever long enough, and a place for a fulcrum, and I shall
move the earth!” Given the tools, one man can do _anything_. There’s
plenty of precedent for this. Aside from the things which produce a man,
aside from the multitude of factors which make his environment, if the
man is capable, and if the environment provides tools and a time ripe
for action, that man can use his tools to their utmost extent. Hitler
did it. John D. Rockefeller and Jay Gould did it. Kathleen Winsor did
it. Given the tools, mankind can do _anything_.

I was given the single greatest tool in history. I stumbled on it. I’ll
tell you the truth: I worked like a hound dog to find it, once I
suspected it was there.

It’s a theory and a device. The theory has to do with binding energy;
the device releases and controls it. It is all completely and clearly
explained elsewhere; I’ll come to that in time. Roughly speaking,
however, it is a controlled diffusion of matter. Any gas can be rarefied
and diffused. So, I have discovered, can any matter. Further, it can be
diffused analytically. Binding energy is actually a component of matter.
If a close-orbit situation can be induced between the electrons and the
nucleus of an atom, its binding energy can be withdrawn, if equally
diffused, to form a field around the atom. The field is toroidal, and
has peculiar qualities.

For one thing, it does crazy things to the apparent center of gravity of
the mechanism producing the field. Any seeking device which tends to
locate mass directs itself at the c.g. But on approaching a field of
this sort, the closer it gets, the harder it becomes for it to find the
c.g., since the apparent center of mass is out at the edges. When
directed at the actual center of the device, your seeker veers violently
to the edge—hard enough, generally, to make it pass the mechanism
altogether.

The field distorts and reflects radio and light waves in an extremely
complex fashion. These waves are led powerfully to follow the outlines
of the toroid; but since the field is a closed one—closed as tightly as
only binding energy can close anything—light and radio cannot penetrate,
no matter how strong the temptation. And so they are thrown back, rather
than reflected in reflection’s ordinary sense, and return to their
detectors—receivers, photographic plates, or what have you—in a rather
distorted pattern.

The field also has a strange effect on valence, making it possible to
build chemical compounds out of elements of similar valence. The atomic
situation within the toroid—in the hole of the donut, as it were—is
weird, and is the place where such compounding can be done. Exact data
on this will also be given you.

Now, here is exactly what was done. Having found the way to generate
this field, I debated the wisdom of giving it to a world on the verge of
war. I contemplated destroying all my evidence, but could not; the thing
was too big; humanity needed it too much. But it was too big for even a
unified humanity on one planet. It’s big enough for all of space, and
needs a humanity big enough to control it. I felt that if humanity were
big enough to unify, it would be big enough for this device. It is, now,
or you spacemen would not be listening to me.

After having developed the binding-energy field, I invented another
device—the Spy-Eye. I knew that the little eavesdroppers would be
produced by the thousands, so that a few would not be missed. A
half-dozen were launched with their selector circuits altered and some
of their equipment replaced. Their fueling was different, too; there is
a reaction-formula using the b.-e. field which will be found along with
the rest of these things.

My half-dozen Spy-Eyes, powered vastly beyond any of their little
brothers and sisters, went outside and took up their positions in space.

_They are the Outsiders_.

The noise in the Jansky radiation was pure propaganda, and its execution
was simple—practically primitive. It was a trick once used by illegal
radio stations during one of the wars, I forget which. Three of them,
widely separated and synchronized, sent out the same signal, beamed to
an Earth diameter. Direction-finders on Earth obediently pointed out
their _resultant_—a direction in which they did not exist! The Spy-Eyes
themselves were too small and too far away to be detectable, unless one
knew exactly what to look for and where to look. The amplitude of the
signals was raised gradually until it reached a pre-selected volume.
Then one of the Spy-Eyes set up a b.-e. field and dropped toward Earth.
It looked strange and huge. It came in close and circled Earth twice at
a high velocity. I think I had more trouble there than at any other
point, but I managed, finally, to wangle the Board of Strategy into
firing on it. Their shell hit nothing; the b.-e. field disrupted its
atomic warhead, for in the presence of a hard-radiation source, the
field increases the effective critical mass. The Spy-Eye itself is what
fell on Japan; it was armed, of course, and was mistaken for a little
bomb. What made the explosion so intense was the fact that the field
held the disrupting matter together for a fraction of a millisecond
longer than it had ever done before. The object which fell near Minsk
was a piece of stage-proppery I had made earlier. It, too, had a b.-e.
field generator on its back. Again it exhibited its exclusiveness and
its penetrating power; it acted like a thing of great mass when it hit
the ground. It, too, had a b.-e. generator on its back. Again it
exhibited its exclusiveness and its penetrating power; it acted like a
thing of great mass when it hit the ground. The generator was, of
course, blown to dust on impact, leaving only the supposed specimen.

The other three Outsider ships were Spy-Eyes, b.-e. field-equipped. The
bombs were real bombs, however, they were supplied by Satellite 18,
which, if examined, will be found inexplicably empty of its
interceptors. I put guiding heads on them, and sent one to each of my
“Outsider” Spy-Eyes.

I think that explains everything. If you question my motives, regard
Earth as you deep-spacemen see it today—unified, powerful, secure within
and without. Humanity is ready, now, to take the first steps toward
greatness. Therefore:

Send my name—Simmons—in the old International Morse Code on 28.275
meters, from a distance of ten statute miles from any of the three
Outsider ships, at one thousand watts power. Repeat the name four times.
The field will break down; you may then locate the Spy-Eyes and pull
them in. Dismantle them; inside you will find this recording and certain
papers, which contain everything I know about the binding-energy field.
Use it well.

Colonel Simmons leaned back in his chair. His face was gray. “Muscles—is
this all true?”

“You know it is. You’ve seen it in action.”

“Now what have I done?” muttered the colonel.

“Jumped to conclusions,” said the doctor easily.

The colonel’s mouth opened and closed spasmodically. Then in violent
reaction, he swore. “You couldn’t’ve done it!” he roared. “You set the
timetable for this whole thing and built it into those Spy-Eyes. Well,
what about all that was done here—the interceptors from White Sands, and
the development of the satellites and all that?”

“Leroy, old horse, take it easy, will you? Who had charge of all that
development? Who had the final say on design? Who outlined the exact use
of each piece of equipment—by way, of course, of using it to its
greatest efficiency?”

“You did. You did.” The colonel covered his face. “All that power. All
that control. You could have had the whole world for the taking, if
you’d wanted it. Instead—”

“Instead, everyone on Earth has a job, enough food, good quarters, and
an equal chance at education. I have it on good authority that the next
session of Congress will unify divorce laws and traffic laws in this
country. Russia has not only a second party but a third one. Social
legislation is beginning to follow the lines of the Postal Union, and
already a movement has started to have the governments pay the people
their full wages during a six-week vacation. No communism, no fascism;
function is the law, and social security—lowercase—is function.”

“Shut up!” mouthed the colonel in a peculiar tone, half moan, half roar.
He held his head and he rocked.

The doctor clasped his shoulder and laughed, “Listen to me, Leroy,” he
said, “and I’ll tell you something funny. You know how little, stupid
anecdotes will stick with you, like the limerick about the young lady
from Wheeling, and the time you took the ball of tar to bed with you and
we had to shave your head? Well, believe it or not, I honestly think
that this job I have just done had its source in a couple—no,
three—things that happened to me when I was young. When I think of them,
and look at the world today—my!”

He took a turn around the floor. His brother sat still.

“Wells had something to do with it. Wells pointed out, mostly
indirectly, that only a miracle could make humans work together. And
sometimes his miracle was entertaining but untenable, because it
constituted a common aim for mankind. That never did work. World peace
is the finest aim a race could have, but it never tempted us much.
Wells’ other miracle was a common enemy—the Martian invasion, for
example. Now, that makes sense. It did then and it does now.

“And here are the silly little things that have stuck with me. Remember
that summer when I got a job as a dirt-moving foreman on a canal job?
Two of the muckers got into a fight out by one of the machines. I got up
into a dragline and dumped a load of sand on the two of them. They
stopped fighting, ganged up on me, and punched the daylights out of me.”
He laughed.

“Then there was the other one. It was even sillier. It was in a
restaurant, right after I started to teach at Drexel Tech. There were
two bubble-headed little chicks sitting at a nearby table, verbally
clawing each other’s eyes out over a young man. Just as I was about to
get up and move back out of the combat area, they spotted the young man
in question submitting to the wiles of a very cute redhead. Whereupon
the combatants were suddenly allies, and on the spot”—he laughed
again—“concocted a devilish scheme to squirt ink on the contents of the
redhead’s clothesline!”

The colonel was looking at him dully.

“The common denominator,” continued the doctor, “in the analysis of
Wells, the fight on the canal job, and the feline fiddle-faddle in the
café, was surprisingly valid, considering the wide difference in the
nature of the fields of combat. It boils down to this: that human
conflicts cease to be of importance in the face of a common enemy.
‘Divide and rule’ has its obverse; ‘unite and conquer.’ That’s what the
world has done during the Attack; except that instead of conquering the
Outsider, it has conquered itself—still its common enemy.”

“Wells,” murmured the colonel. “I remember that. I was reading him and
told you the miracle idea. I was in military prep, and you were a
freshman in college.”

“Gosh yes,” said the doctor. “I remember, Leroy.”

The colonel seemed to be thinking hard, and slowly. He spoke slowly.
“Muscles,” he said, “remember how I wore your freshman dinky when you
came home for a weekend?”

“Do I!” chuckled the doctor. “You wouldn’t give it back, and I spend the
next six weeks sweeping out seniors’ rooms because I showed up at school
without it. Heh! Remember me strutting around in your gray cape when you
were at the Point?”

“Yeh. We were always doing that. Your tie, my tie, our tie. Those were
the days. You wouldn’t fit my clothes now, Fatso.”

“Is _that_ so!” laughed the doctor, delighted to see his brother making
some effort to come out of his doldrum. “Listen, son, you rate too much
to be in shape. Too many flunkies to bend over for you when you want
your shoes tied.”

The colonel whipped off the coat with all those shiny buttons. “You
couldn’t button that around your fallen chest.”

In answer the grinning doctor shucked out of his laboratory smock and
put his arms into the uniform jacket. With some difficulty and a certain
amount of sucking in and holding back, he got it buttoned. “The hat,” he
demanded. He put it on. It was too small.

Meanwhile the colonel slipped into the smock, with its solder-flux
stains and its worn elbows. He flapped it in front of him. “What do you
do with all this yardage? Smuggle stuff? Hey, Muscles; let’s have a look
in the cheval glass in the office. I want to see what I’d look like as a
Great Brain.”

They went into the office, through the door in the shower stall. The
doctor, all aglitter in his brother’s jacket, went first. There was a
man standing just by the outside door. He had a black cloth over his
nose and mouth and a silenced automatic in his hand.

The colonel, his smock flapping, pushed past his brother and walked out
into the room. The man shot him twice and disappeared through the door.

“Leroy! Who did it, kid?”

“I did,” said the colonel. “_No!_ No doctor. Too late. Stay—”

“You … oh. _Oh!_ That bullet was meant for me. The jacket switch! But
why? Who was it?”

“Never mind … him,” said the colonel. “Hired. Psychoed. Whole thing
planned. Foolproof escape. All witnesses called away. He doesn’t know
you. Or me. My idea. Was very … careful.”

“Why? Why?”

“Found out you … work with … enemy—” His voice trailed off. He closed
his eyes sleepily and lay still for a moment. Then, his face twisted
with effort, he sat suddenly upright. His voice returned—his normal,
heavy, crackling tone. “I had proof—proof enough that you were a
traitor, Muscles. I was afraid you’d get clear if you got a chance to
work on a court. But I couldn’t bring myself to kill you with my own
hands. I figured it out this way.”

“So he’d be there, and shoot me when we came out of the office. But why
didn’t you call him off?”

“Couldn’t. He had orders to shoot the civilian. You were an officer for
the moment. He didn’t know us, I tell you. I radioed to a third party,
who knows nothing. He gave this hood the starting gun.” He raised his
left hand. On the wrist was the miniature transmitter. “I called him
when you admitted you worked with the Outsiders … then you
explained … and I couldn’t call back; he was on his way here.”

“Leroy, you fool! Why didn’t you let him go ahead? Why did you make that
silly switch? My work’s done. Nothing can change it now.”

“Muscles … I’m … old-line Army. Can’t help it … don’t like this … brave
new … never could. You’re fit for it. You made it; you live in it.
Besides, you’ll … appreciate the joke better than … I would.”

“What do you mean, kid?”

“You underestimated … you thought you’d be dead when the … spacemen
heard your recording.” He laughed weakly. “You won’t be, you know.
Things’re moving too fast.”

There was a sudden, horrible spell of coughing.

And then Dr. Simmons was alone, holding his dead brother’s head in his
arms, rocking back and forth, buffeted and drowning in an acid flood of
grief.

And behind it—far, far behind it, his articulate mind said dazedly,
_Great day in the morning, he’s right! What’ll they make of me—a saint,
or a blood-red Satan?_



THE LOVE OF HEAVEN


WARNER STEPPED OUT over the moon-washed outcropping and cast about for
the Danby Trail. Fellow trotted past him, stood and sniffed the hot,
dark air, and looked up and back at Warner.

He leaned down and clapped the collie’s shoulder. “You know where it is,
dogface,” he grinned. “Quit stalling. Let’s go!”

The dog waited, and when he took a step forward, ran ahead to the black
mouth of the forest trail. “Half hound, half homing pigeon,” muttered
Warner, and followed.

He stepped into the shadows and hesitated a moment, blinking, shifting
the strap of his carbine to let his sticky shoulder breathe. “Fellow!”

Fellow’s rumbling growl answered him.

Warner was quite familiar with Fellow’s vocabulary; there were barks,
yaps, whimpers and growls, and variations of all. He had heard this
growl before—not often, but not to be ignored. Once it was a wildcat
flattened on a limb above him. Once it was an impending ice slide. And
once it was a man, crouched in the shadows of his porch, waiting for him
after one of these night hunts. All three were killers. Warner was still
very much alive.

Eyes wide, pupils round in the velvet dark, Warner stepped forward with
the sliding, silent stride of the forester. His toe touched the dog.
Slowly he half-knelt, and ran his hand over Fellow’s quivering back. The
collie was tense, low on the ground. Warner’s hand felt the flattened
ears, the curled lips.

“What is it, boy?”

Again there was the ominous rumble. Warner strained his eyes in the
direction indicated by the dog’s straining, sensitive nose. There was
nothing to be seen but blackness, and a faint oval of moonlight
somewhere off the trail.

Fellow inched forward, then was still again. Warner looked uselessly
down at him, and, because it was the only thing to look at, back at the
patch of light.

It moved.

Warner’s back hair prickled. His tongue drove against his lower teeth,
his nostrils flared, and a cold ball of terror nestled below his heart.

Moonlight has no face. Moonlight does not move toward you silently,
taking shapes as it passes underbrush. Moonlight does not stand before
you, looking like a naked man.

It stood looking at him, glowing softly. It was six and a half feet
tall, too wide at the shoulder, too narrow at the hips, with arms and
legs too thin and a head not too large, but too high.

But its face …

It wore an expression of indescribable grief. Its face spoke of loss too
great to bear, of the incontrovertible end of some great, sustaining
hope. The despair was lined and underlined by the strength of that face.
It was the face of a conqueror and of a sage, molded of the clay of
power and understanding. And it was utterly defeated.

Warner was not an imaginative man, and he was schooled to danger. His
frozen mind broke free almost instantly and told him _it’s a ghost!_—for
there was no time for any careful analysis, any testing of
improbabilities.

“Control it,” said the ghost, and pointed at Fellow, who snarled.

Warner’s mind was more free than his tongue. His mind formed a demanding
question, and his mouth managed only an interrogative grunt. And before
he could lick his lips and reform them, Fellow was away from him and in
midair, his long jaws hungry for the phantom’s throat.

The apparition turned easily, bent backwards from the hips, and Fellow
hurtled by, his teeth castanetting together. He squirmed around and
landed facing the ghost, which watched calmly. Fellow snarled softly—it
was like a purr—and bunched his feet together. The ghost braced its
legs, ready for another spring. But Fellow did not spring. Close to the
ground, he charged at the long, slender legs. The ghost dodged the dog’s
teeth, but could not move quite fast enough to avoid the furry flank,
which thumped the calf of its leg.

Fellow spun to attack again—and kept spinning. He yelped and snapped
viciously at his side. Close enough to the glowing figure to be visible
by its strange light, Fellow bent like a caterpillar with a fire ant in
its side, and crabbed away into the darkness, biting himself with teeth
afroth in sudden foam; and he whimpered like a sick and pain-racked
child.

_“Fellow!”_

The dog cried, somewhere in the darkness. Warner leapt toward the sound,
caught his foot in a root and fell heavily. Oddly, his right hand turned
under him and was driven into his solar plexus as he fell on it. The
breath rushed out of him, and for seconds he lay helpless, frightened
and furious, saying, “Uh! Uh!” through his knotted windpipe.

Then he could see again, because the specter had moved between him and
the dog. Fellow was on his back, kicking feebly. The dog turned on his
side once more, bit again at his quarter, and suddenly lay still. His
eyes were open and rolled up, his tongue out, bloody, bitten half
through.

Warner got to his knees.

“Do not touch it,” said the ghost warningly.

Warner looked up at it. “You killed him,” he whispered, and in one
smooth motion shouldered out of the strap of his carbine and raised it.

The ghost disappeared.

_I’ve gone blind_, thought Warner. He stood up, knees flexed, head low,
the carbine at the ready, prepared to snap a bullet at anything, or the
sound of anything.

His chest began to hurt, and he remembered to breathe.

There was silence, and blackness, fear and fury, and the warm barrel on
the heel of his left thumb, the formed grip of the stock embracing each
of three right fingers. He turned his head slowly, turned from the
waist, from the ankles, around and back, waiting, tense. The blackness
was too much, too close. He raised his eyes up, and farther up, until he
could see the ghostly second reflection of moonlight on the roof of
leaves above. The dim, elusive light was good.

There was a faint sound to his right. The carbine breech came up to his
cheek. Silence.

He blew from his nostrils. “_Move_, damn you!”

Something moved. Something whirred and thrashed in the underbrush.
Warner fired three times, the gun snuggling more affectionately to
shoulder and cheek each time.

Silence again. He lowered the gun to be free to turn his head. It was
wrenched out of his unsuspecting fingers. He grabbed wildly at it,
clutching nothing, and staggered. He whirled, whirled again, all but
seeing the certain flash, feeling the inevitable thump of his own lead
into his body. He dropped, then, and lay still, the way he had done at
Tulagi.

There was light behind and above him. He cringed from it, gasping, dove
for a dimly-seen trunk, and crouched behind it, not looking at the light
until he had cover.

The ghost was standing twenty feet away, holding his carbine easily,
watching him. He ducked back. Nothing happened. The light did not waver.

He peeped out again. The ghost stood there watching him with its tragic,
wise eyes. It held the carbine at its hip, not aiming directly at him,
certainly not aiming away. He knew it saw him, but it made no move.
Looking at the strange, sad figure, Warner felt that it would wait there
all night—all week. Time seemed to have nothing to do with that not-old,
not-young, infinitely patient face.

Warner pressed his lips together, cleared his throat.

“Who are you?” he asked hoarsely.

The ghost answered, “I am—” It paused, searching Warner’s face,
hesitating as if choosing exactly the right word. “I am—regret.”

“Regret?” Wild, extraneous references tumbled through Warner’s brain.
_“I am the ghost of Christmas Past”_—the masks of Comedy and Tragedy
painted on the proscenium of his college auditorium. Mister
Coffee-Nerves. What mummery was this?

The ghost was trying again. Warner could sense the effort for accuracy.
“Not regret. I am—sorry. I am sorry your dog is death. Your dog is
dead.”

“Who are you?” barked Warner.

The ghost again searched his face. “I am you,” it said, and waited.
“No,” it said, and muttered to itself, “I, you, he. It.” It looked at
Warner. “It is I,” and it struck its chest with the carbine barrel.

Warner licked his lips. He could not know what this glowing thing was,
but it was obviously demented. He asked: “Are you going to shoot me?”

“Shoot,” said the ghost. “Shoot me.” It looked suddenly at the carbine,
as if it had just understood the reference. “Not shoot. Not you dead.
Not … shoot … you … dead.”

_That’s nice to know_, thought Warner sardonically. _It’d be even nicer
if he put the gun down_.

“Yes,” said the ghost. It turned, leaned the carbine carefully against a
tree, and walked a pace or two away. “Now you—” and it pointed to the
ground in front of Warner’s tree.

“You want me to come out?”

“Come out.”

Warner considered carefully. He had no idea of the capabilities of this
weird creature, but it seemed human, or near enough to being human that
it might be possible to fool it. If he could keep it in conversation
long enough, he might be able to edge over and get his hands on the
carbine and, in two senses, put an end to this nightmare. He came out.

“You not. You not … can not … get gun, get the gun. A, an, the, some,
them, those,” said the ghost. “What those? What are those?”

“What?”

“A, an, the, and those.”

“Oh. Articles, I guess you mean. You don’t speak much English?”

The creature made that strange search of his face again. “Specific,” it
said suddenly. “Make general. What are ‘a, an, the, dog, gun?’ ”

“Words,” said Warner after a puzzled pause.

“Words,” said the ghost. “Good. Words. Say me … say to me … tell … teach
words to me.”

Warner looked briefly at the carbine leaning against the tree. Fifteen,
sixteen feet … a sudden lunge might do it. He might have to grapple for
a second, but—

“Do not touch gun,” said the ghost.

In spite of himself, Warner almost grinned. “What are you—a mind
reader?”

“I read. I hear-see-read. Mind, yes. I read mind. I read your mind. You
make … make—” He gazed at Warner’s face. “You think, I read. Yes.”

“Telepathy,” said Warner informatively.

“Yes. Telepathy. You send, I … I—”

“Receive?”

“Yes. You send, I receive. I send, you not receive.”

“Why?”

“You not … not … you can not. I can. You … man? Yes. You are a man. I
are … am … I am not a man.”

Warner’s unquenchable humor curled to the surface. “You’re kidding,” he
said, and to his astonishment the creature laughed uproariously.

“Give me general word, man.”

“Gen … oh. Human.”

“Yes. You are human. I am not human.”

“What are you?”

Again one of those searches. “Different,” it said finally. “Human, but
different … kind.” It turned suddenly and pulled up a shrub, deftly
stripping it down to a stem and a fork. It searched him again—the
process was quite without sensation to Warner—and, pointing to the stem,
said: “This is primate.” One long luminous finger ran up a side branch.
“This is human, you.” Indicating the other branch, “This human, me.”

“Oh. You’re a mutation.”

“Yes. No.”

“Maybe?”

“Maybe. Maybe you are a mutation.”

“I don’t understand.”

The creature put its finger on the crotch of the stick.
“Fifteens—fifteen hundreds generations past … back … ago.”

“You mean the race branched fifteen hundred generations ago?”

“Yes. My generations. Long ones. One of me is three of you.”

Warner translated this for himself: “Forty-five hundred generations ago
the human race branched into your kind and my kind. That right?”

“Right.”

“Then where on earth have you been all this time?”

“Not on Earth.”

“Oh—ho! The Man from Mars!”

“Not Mars,” said the specter seriously. “Not a planet of this sun. Human
can not live on this sun’s planets except this one.”

“Where is it, then?”

It tried; he could see it trying. Suddenly he understood the searching
process; the creature could get a word, or an idea, more easily if he
brought it up to the surface of his mind. He visualized a star map; the
ghost made an impatient sound. Warner’s lips twitched; he had always had
a very bad memory. He visualized the night sky.

“Yes,” said the glowing man.

Warner thought of constellations; of the Cross, and Lyra, Scorpio,
Sirius, and the Hyades. And when he visualized the Seven Sisters, the
Pleiades, the ghost exclaimed. Warner could not remember how the
Pleiades were placed, exactly, but he knew that five of the major stars
were easily visible, the sixth fainter, and the seventh invisible except
to the very best eyesight.

“Yes. Faint one,” said the ghost. “But is not one star. Is many. Is not
one group of stars; you see through stars near a line from here to
there. My planet is not of faint Pleiades Sister; is through it, far
away on other side. You are thinking about the gun again. Do not touch
it.”

Warner swore.

“Your dog is dead,” said the glowing man. “I did not want to dead … to
kill your dog. You are the first man for me here. I not … did not know
you can … could not hear-receive me. I heard you. I talked-thought to
you. I told you to meet me. I told you not to touch me. Your dog flew to
me. I not … did not want your dog to touch me. He would dead himself if
he touch me. You will dead yourself if you touch me. Your dog is dead. I
am sorry. I do not want you to be dead. I will be too sorry if you are
dead. When I understand that you can not hear me except me … I speak, I
went … dark and took away gun. Human with weapon never think.”

_Now I get sociological truths_, thought Warner wryly. “Why will you
kill me if I touch you?” he asked.

“Kill,” said the other, and looked at his face. “Kill, die, murder,
execute, slaughter. No. I will not kill you if you touch me. Kill is
what you do with … with desire, yes. I say a different thing. I say if
you touch me you will die. I am sorry your dog is dead. I am more sorry
if you are dead. I do not desire you dead. My … me … I am—”

“Poison?”

“Yes, poison. Poison. Almost all Earth things I poison. Very … fast.”
And again came that surge of tragedy across the strange, tall face. “All
things of Earth. All living things—” It still held the forked twig; it
looked at it sadly and, without throwing it, with a gesture of
willlessness, let it slip from between its fingers to the ground. “That
would be dead now, without … even … even if I did not break and pull
away leaves. Just to touch it—My … my feet … footprints are dead
places.”

“But why? Why do you do it?”

“Why? I do not do it! I do not make and spread poison! I _am_ poison!”

“I don’t understand. What are you doing here? Why stay here if you kill
everything you touch?”

“I will … try. If you do not understand, tell me to … to stop.

“We are different humans, and this is our place where we began … this,
this planet. We grew fast and got … gained—”

“Evolved?”

“Evolved very fast, yes. We made a … tools … machines … Think of men
building. Think of what men must have to build. Yes! Yes. Intelligence.
Logic. Intuition? Yes, intuition? Yes, intuition too. We understood each
other well. You do not understand each other. You work with you, he
works with he. If you work together, you will build, but you
are … important. Or he is important. With us, the building was
important. Thirty generations made us free from … from things outside
us.”

“Environment?”

“Yes. Free. To have a … problem was to find the way … the way to solve
it. It was … different evolution. Evolution in plants, in animals, is
try this, try that, this is good, that is no good, what is no good dies.
We were different. We tried only what would be good, what would build.
Understand?”

“I think so,” said Warner. “We have built more in the last three hundred
years than we did in the three thousand before that.”

“Yes. It was the way, the way we began. We lived in a valley. We lived
long, each of us, and very close. We were always few. We did not go to
all the earth, like you-men. We stayed in our warm valley bottom and
built. We did not build cities like you-men. We did not need them. We
built inside”—it touched its head—“and a few machines, when we needed
them. Then came a time when we knew our valley would be killed by the
sea. It was below the sea. There was a thin mountain at the end, and it
would break and the sea would come in.

“Some did not care. Some moved farther inland to be saved, and we never
heard about them again. A few made a machine, and left this planet.”

“A spaceship!”

“Not a ship. Not like the picture you are thinking. It would be good if
you could hear … see my thinks. No, it was a machine. It made … solid
things not-solid, and then made them solid again somewhere else. The
me-men, and some women, went in the machine and the machine went away
from this planet.

“The machine was built to … to seek a planet like this one; this heavy,
this warm, with this air. It went far.”

“Did it take long?”

“There is no take-long in such a machine. It is not understood. No man
has gone in the machine for a little way. Only a long way. I am the
first to go away and to come back. To be in the machine is to set the
part which seeks, and to start the machine. Then the machine is there.
To be outside the machine is to watch it … disappear. It is not known if
it will come back soon, or fast, or not. Or not come back. I may come
back when and where I left. Or later … large later.”

“Why have you come?”

“When me-men left this planet, the machine found another. It was like
this and not like this. It was more warm. It was more dark. The sun had
more … more—”

“Radiation?”

“Not more. Different. We had mutation, some mutation. Not much. This—”
and, shockingly, the light went out again. And came back. “Like small
animal … insect … like firefly. Cold light. At will. But that was many
generations.

“A thing happened. The machine came to that planet and broke. It is not
understood what happened. Some dies then. The others made a place to
live. Many more died. The plants were not right. The plants were the
same building … the same … the same chemically as here. The animals were
the same.” A questing pause. “Colloidal. Carbohydrates. Yes. But a small
different—

“Think of a thing, to give me the words … a thing you eat, or you put
inside you, and it makes you happy, or it makes you move fast, or it is
a poison, or you sleep.”

“Drugs?”

“Yes. Drugs. Not drugs. Like drugs. What can you make inside you that
will do these things?”

“I don’t think I … hold on! Hormones?”

“Yes, yes, hormones. Plants make poisons to make animals sick, so the
animals will not eat the plants. Some plants are always poison because
no animal can make the same poison or the … the … antidote? Yes,
antidote, but also the thing that makes the animal strong to the
poison.”

“You mean the animal gets a high enough tolerance for the poison so that
the poison is harmless.”

“Yes. Plants make hormone poisons; animals make hormones for tolerance.
Yes. When me-men lived first on that planet they had no tolerance. Many
died. Grass, trees, common, just like this”—the luminous hand
waved—“were poison. Animals which ate those plants were poisoned. Most
of the me-men died. Some did not.”

“Survival of the fittest,” said Warner unnecessarily.

“Not a law,” said the creature, as if it had found a blue cigarette in a
box of white ones. “A balance. A balance in fluxes.

“What was left was few, sick, weak. Necessary to fight hard to live.
They became fewer every generation for too long. They lost
the … the … thinks, the way to make machines, the big simple thinks
behind the way to make machines, the big simple thinks behind the way to
make machines. A long time before they were strong again, and when they
were strong they were different.

“They knew they changed. But they knew where they came from, and that
they were once strong, and they cared for the strength. For the many
generations they were weak and sick and few, they held to one big
thing—this planet, this Earth. This was the Beginning, this was the
Source. For long, long, they had nothing great but this one think. They
felt hard about it. They—”

“A religion?”

The other studied the word as it flowed from the convolutions of
Warner’s brain. “Like religion. You have in you some … things—Think of
the things you can not touch with your hands, things which are big. Yes.
Yes—Religion, and more. Love. Pride. Courage. What is this one?
Self-respect? Yes, we have that, but not self … selves … the thing
me-men had was like all those in one central feeling, and all felt the
same and could share. Earth was our greatness, and it would be our goal.
A man, any kind of man, builds on a simple strong thing—an idea or a
rock or a natural force. Earth was the thing of greatness to us, the
source of our strength and the strength that we held when we were weak.
We are strong again; we built strong, and we built around the idea of
Earth. The thing we worked for was to be wise enough again to build
another traveling machine. We did. A small one. Big for one. Big enough
for—me.”

“We have had civilizations like that,” said Warner thoughtfully.
“Civilizations in which the government and the religion was the same,
where customs and laws all sprang from worship.”

“Worship. This was not worship.”

“It wasn’t? Sounds like Shinto to me,” said Warner bluntly.
“Ancestor-worship.”

“Wrong,” said the other, just as bluntly. “When we were weak, we were
great, because we were great when we were strong. We were same thing,
weak or strong, before and now. We were … are great. Ancestor worship is
all in the past. We were … are … will be great. And Earth is at the
beginning, and Earth is at the end.” And again the tragedy swept that
strange face.

“We have had trouble with races which thought they were better than any
other,” said Warner, his distaste evident.

“Better? You understand small things only. No me-man compares with other
groups. A tree is a great tree because it does the most a tree can do,
and it is no greater than a great grass. I hear … see a thing in
you … yes. I see it. We do not fight against ourselves. Is the
difference between us.”

Warner’s fear had long been replaced by curiosity, and then by wonder.
For the first time he began to feel a respect. After a time he asked:
“What are you going to do?”

“I shall go back,” said the creature. “I shall go back and tell them
that Earth is here, and that it is as the legends and records say, and
that we can never come back. When I tell them that it will melt
the … bones of our building.”

Warner said: “For years many of us have worshiped in a way which
includes a Paradise, a Heaven; and along with it the conviction that we
can never achieve it in the flesh. That is, we go there when we die.”

“That is not for us. Earth is our Paradise, I think; but it is one to be
reached by us with our hands and legs and shoulders, to walk on, to live
in, to be a part with. And if we come we must kill it.”

Warner’s mouth was dry. “The poison—it doesn’t work both ways? The
plants of your planet killed you. Now you have changed. Wouldn’t Earth
kill you?”

“No. We were harmless to our plants, but they killed us. We kill Earth
things, but they can not harm us.”

“Then why can’t you come?”

“Because Earth is Earth, and we can not kill it.”

“You mean you are not strong enough to kill it?”

“No. We are strong enough. We are a terrible enemy. We are like you, but
we are like you thinking alike, and together. We could come and kill
everything, and bring our plants and animals, and have the Earth.”

“I don’t understand. You seem to be difficult to stop once you want
something. Why don’t you come?”

The glowing stranger looked at him for a long time, quietly. “We rule
our planet, and we despise it. When we lived on Earth, we were a part of
Earth. We do not want Earth as a part of us; and we may have it no other
way.”

“Your tradition is that strong?”

“The bones of our building,” said the creature again. “The base, the
core, the beginning, the end, and the goal.”

Warner shrugged. “You will have to find something new, then.”

“We will die first.”

And Warner knew that that was not a figure of speech.

Warner came back the next morning, to bury his dog. He concentrated on
the things he was doing; the steps he took, the bite and lift and throw
of his shovel, the gloved meticulousness with which he sponged off his
carbine with a rag soaked in the bottle of bleach he brought with him.
He was aware that he had given and received a farewell last night, and
that he had been told about the bleach, and that, to the stranger, it
simply did not matter whether he told his story or not. It could not
matter.

These things were too much a part of that other experience, the thing
which happened after the stranger’s light went out, after five quiet
minutes during which Warner sat in the blackness thinking nothing,
nothing at all, just watching his etched memory of the shining, grieving
face.

Then there had been that glare of red, and he had floundered and
stumbled to it, to see the stranger sitting in a simple chair,
clean-lined, hooded, with some barely-glimpsed controls on one desklike
arm. The stranger was distorted, spread, flattened and—curved, curved
like the surface of a sphere, going back and away, but in directions
which could not be followed. Then the light was a whirlpool of
incandescent blood, its inner surface dwindling away like a Dalinese
perspective, its remote convergence a speck of glittering scarlet shaped
like the stranger and his chair, tiny, or distant. Warner was numb,
shocked, blasted by the enormity of that indescribable _direction_.

Therefore he concentrated on the simple, solid things he had to
do—burying, cleaning, walking. His separation by a few hours from that
vertiginous red distance was no separation at all, and perhaps it never
would be. At the moment he watched it, he knew his consciousness could
have gone down into it, or_—out_ into it. And now, this morning, he felt
that he could still lose himself in it if he let go.

Plodding through the dim wood toward the trail, he came to the spot at
which he had had his strange encounter. Here on the moss, there on the
side of a shrub, yonder on the rocks where the furry body of a dead
mouse lay twisted, were patches of blight. Some of it looked like the
work of a blowtorch, some of it looked like a rust; but wherever it was,
something was dead.

He stopped. Fellow was dead, that mouse was dead, that moss and those
leaves where dead. A man could be dead, a culture could be dead. He
tried to understand a civilization built on a metaphysical concept, and
could not. He tried to understand how a civilization could die when that
concept was negated, and could not. He knew, however, that these things
could be whether he understood or not. He knew, because, for a moment,
he had looked in a direction which he did not understand.

He closed his eyes and frowned. “Keep it simple,” he muttered. Those
other-men, those creatures—they _had_ to find something different. “We
will die first.” What would that death be? And what would come after the
death?

Life after death.

He laughed. They’d die and go to Heaven.

Then he remembered what Heaven was to these people, and he stopped
laughing. It wasn’t funny. He looked at the blight. It wasn’t funny at
all.

He sat down on a rock where he could see the dead mouse, put his chin in
his hands, and wondered how, how in the name of Heaven, he could tell
anyone.



TILL DEATH DO US JOIN


SANDRA OPENED THE door. It was Golly. He walked in, kicked the door
closed without looking at it, taking Sandra’s arm as he passed her. He
spun her around to him for a kiss.

She wiped her mouth. “I don’t like that, Golly.”

“I do.” He kissed her again. His clothes were not very clean. Sandra
stayed passive in his arms, waiting to be released. He pushed her away
abruptly, and turned his back. “Paul’s been here,” he said.

She shook her head, making a tiny negative sound. Golly picked up a
severely expensive handkerchief from the divan and tossed it to her.
“Ain’t yours.”

“It is.”

He sat down, lit a cigarette, and then looked at her. “With that P sewed
on?” He compressed his lips. “I got no use for a two-timing woman,
Sanny. Even less for a dumb one.”

Sandra’s forehead paled, heightening the red on her cheekbones. “If you
don’t like it, Golly—”

When Golly laughed, his teeth showed right up to the gums. He was wiry
and slender, with shoulders a bit too wide for his hips. Sandra was
always unnerved by his utter relaxation. With Paul, now, she was
continually afraid of using bad grammar.

“What’s funny?” she snapped.

“You,” Golly said, not laughing any more at all. “You really think you
can get rid of me just by telling me off?” He folded his arms. “If I
ever catch Paul here, I’ll kill him. You know that.”

It was perfectly true, she thought, watching him, trying to build up
some armor against his narrow gaze. “Tell _him_ that,” she said slowly.
“He’s your brother, not mine. Incidentally, I’m not married to either of
you. Not likely to be, either, as long as this feud goes on.”

She walked over to him, stood near, knowing that he would touch her if
she came an inch closer, knowing that he wanted her to. Her hair was
chestnut, and she wore it long, with a rakish part on the left. Her nose
was aquiline and her mouth a little twisted when she relaxed her
features. Her brows made her eyes look closer together than they were,
so that in profile her face changed startlingly.

No one ever treated Sandra gently but Paul. Paul was funny, though. You
never could tell about Paul.… Golly, now, was predictable. Golly was
going to get sore, right away, when she got this off her chest. She
spoke freely:

“Golly, I like Paul. Can you understand that? Yes, he was here. He’ll be
here any time he feels like it, any time I ask him to come. I won’t have
you telling me who can and who can’t come here.”

A smile sprang to his lips as if it were something caught from his
shrugging shoulders. He rose and came toward her. She stepped back, and
he continued across to the door.

“I’m not rushing you, Sanny,” he said, “but you might as well get used
to the idea of having me around. ’Night.” The door closed behind him,
then opened again. He leaned in and said very softly, “If you see Paul
again, he won’t live twenty-four hours. You can tell him that from me.”

Sandra drew a breath to speak, put out her hand—but he was gone. She
stood for a full minute looking at the door, and then went to the
divan’s end-table and viciously snubbed out his cigarette.

At a dance Sandra had met Paul. He was clean-cut, charming, and wore
well cut, soft-toned clothes and perfect collars. From the very first
Sandra sensed some lack in him, but could never determine quite what it
was. She stopped wondering about it when she met Golly.

In the two brothers she found what she wanted. If Paul had ever reached
for her suddenly, wordlessly, kissed her so that it hurt—Well, it would
have been Paul. But he never did. Had Golly been soft-spoken and a
little gentler, she could have loved him.

And they hated each other so much that it was dangerous for her to see
either, once they both became interested.

They hated each other, and yet it was through Paul, in a way, that she
first met Golly. She had a date one night with Paul and the bell rang
twenty minutes early. She answered it.

“Paul, you’re early. Why—you’re not dressed. Or—that is Paul, isn’t it?”

“It is not, and don’t call me that. I’m Golly.” He wore a thick black
sweater and she did not think he was wearing a shirt.

“Golly? Oh—Paul’s brother. He mentioned you once. Come in. Is Paul—”

“Will you stop talking about that dirty heel?” he snapped.

She was shocked. “Wh-what can I do for you?” she asked faintly.

“Nothin’. Hey, stand over here by the light. Hmmm. You’re okay. Like to
have me around once in a while?”

“Well, I—After all, Mr. Egan—”

“To you my name’s Golly.” His hands took out a cigarette and lit it,
apparently without his knowledge. “Keep away from that big slob.”

“Please!” She was certainly not prudish, but she had never met anyone
like this before.

He did not apologize. Paul would have, for less. Paul often did. Sandra
didn’t like this Golly, this inscrutable, impulsive brother of Paul
Egan. She didn’t like him, and she didn’t tell him to go.

He stayed for forty-five minutes and in that time kissed her twice. He
left her suddenly without saying good-by, and she sat staring at his
cigarette butts for nearly an hour, with her heart beating too fast,
before she realized that Paul had broken their date.

Her annoyance turned to puzzlement, and then to the realization that
Paul had stayed away because Golly came. She laughed, a conscious effort
which made her feel more calm, and spent the evening ironing and
wondering how such a poisonous hatred could develop between the two.

Afterward, Golly dropped in at highly irregular intervals. Always, when
he entered, it would be with that flashing search of the room, that
sniffing of atmosphere. Twice he had sensed Paul’s recent presence, and
the second time it happened was the occasion of his ultimatum. “If you
see Paul again, he won’t live twenty-four hours.”

Sandra was frankly worried. Although admittedly dramatic, Golly could be
extremely thorough. When he decided to kiss her, she got kissed. If he
determined to kill Paul—but they’re _brothers_, she thought in sudden
panic. _Brothers don’t kill each other_.

Do they?

Sandra began breaking dates with Paul. Golly, of course, came more
often.

She liked him less each time—and she wanted to see him more. The
powerful appeal of his arrogant manner almost offset her distaste for
the things he did because of it. She deeply resented the advances he
made, and in her heart resented him for avoiding those he could have
made. She knew, too, that his casualness was neither restraint nor
indifference, but a challenging half-interest. Sandra despised herself
because she was affected by it but.…

Paul came, finally. She ran to the door, thinking it was Golly, for Paul
never came without phoning first. But it was Paul, standing abashed
under the porch light.

“Paul! Oh, you idiot! I told you not to come!”

“I know,” he said gently. “I know you did. But Sandra, I had to know
why, and you wouldn’t say. Can’t I come in for just a moment?”

She stood aside, reminded too vividly of the way Golly rang and then
pushed past her. “For just a moment, then.”

He came in and she took his coat wordlessly, nodding toward the divan.
He sat down and began to pack his pipe neatly and nervously. Golly
smoked cigarettes and left them burning on the edges of tables.

Sandra sat beside him, knowing a little disdainfully that he would come
no closer. She waited for him to say something. The silence grew
painful. Twice he licked his lips and opened his mouth, and twice he
closed it against the pipestem.

Finally he said, “San, please. Why won’t you tell me?”

“Tell you what?”

“Don’t make it any harder than it is!” he barked, and she was startled
by his tone. “Why won’t you see me any more?” When she would not answer,
he asked, “Have I done something?”

_You haven’t done anything, you fool_, she thought acidly. She said,
“No. It’s something you won’t talk about. You mentioned Golly once, when
I asked you if you had any relatives around here. Since then you have
always managed to change the subject.”

His eyes widened. “Golly.” After a long moment he breathed. “Oh. I see.”
The he was quiet for so long that she flared up.

“Well?”

“Sandra,” he said with difficulty, “there are things that—that—”

“That can’t be discussed.” She stood up. “So why bother? Good night,
Paul.”

He stayed where he was, looking at her with wide suffering eyes. “Sit
down, Sandra. I’ll tell you as much as I can. I’d like you to
understand.”

She sat down, waited.

“Golly is—is—he hates me.”

“I know.” She had a sudden, shocking mental picture of Golly’s slitted
gaze, his quiet, deadly threat. “Why?”

“I don’t know,” Paul said, and ran his hand roughly through his
carefully combed hair. His eyes closed. “You know how—how many stories
there have been about—a man’s not wanting to admit to a girl
concerning—insanity in the family.”

“Paul.” Her voice was very gentle.

“Golly is a—a—He’s dangerous, Sandra.”

“I know that, too.”

“If I could only—face him, talk to him, I could make him go away and
never come back. But he—he—”

“He keeps away from you.” She remembered, suddenly, the night Golly had
come when Paul was due, and that Paul had not come at all. “Where does
he work? Where does he live?”

“I don’t know,” said Paul worriedly. “The waterfront, a
warehouse—somewhere around. I never know. I—Sandra!”

She turned with him. Their faces were close.

“There’s a _good_ thing in all this,”: he said. “You wouldn’t see me.
You thought that if I came here he would kill me, and you wanted to make
it—safe for me. You cared enough to—”

She looked at him, his sensitive brow, his tender mouth. “Don’t flatter
yourself!” she blazed. “I don’t want to be the cause of any silly
brawls, that’s all. If you want to get killed, walk in front of a truck!
But don’t get me mixed up in it!”

The beginnings of a smile died on his face. He rose stiffly and went for
his coat. At the door he paused, but when she did not speak, he went
out, closing the door carefully behind him.

_That was a lousy thing to do_, she thought, and ran out on the porch.
“Paul!”

He was at the gate, opening it. He turned and came back.

“I’m sorry, Paul. I flew off the handle.”

“That’s all right,” he said softly. She knew he was still hurt because
he did not offer to take the blame on himself. She drew him inside, but
did not offer to take his coat.

“Listen, Paul. I’m sick and tired of having you two mess up my life.
Tell me what’s the matter and let’s do something about it, once and for
all. This thing can’t go on any longer the way it is. What’s the trouble
between you and Golly, anyway?”

He licked his lips. “It’s a—a sort of psychosis, Sandra. You’ve seen it
before, surely, but in milder forms. Most brothers—and sisters, too—feel
that they are a little incomplete as long as the other exists. This is
only an extreme example of it.” He put up a hand, for she was about to
speak.

“No, San. Don’t catechize me about it. It’ll work out. You’ll see. If I
can once get to him, get to know why he—” He shook his head. “I’ll make
it all right. I’ll get rid of him. Trust me, Sandra—please trust me.”

She looked at him, and the lip which had begun to curl relaxed again. He
was so very sincere, and, for the moment, so very helpless. But he would
be able to do something. And he wanted to; he cared desperately about
it. Golly, now, Golly didn’t care much at all. Not enough to want to do
anything but—but—

“I trust you, Paul. But do something quickly, quickly, darling.” She
leaned forward and kissed him on the mouth; then, crying, ran upstairs.

Paul called her, but she did not answer, and he went away. From her
bedroom window she saw him go down the path with his head bowed. At the
gate he paused, turned, removed his hat and waved it high over his head.
He always did that. Always.

Three nights later, when she came home, she found Golly on the porch
steps, sprawled back as if he had been poured there and half-congealed.

“Well,” she said, stopping before him.

“Hi,” he said, his arm moving by itself to give her a vague salute. She
walked up the steps, trying to pass him. He plucked her from her feet,
landing her ungracefully in his lap.

“Damn you!” she said into his mouth. He moved his head away, looked at
her somberly, and kissed her forehead. Then he set her on her feet.

Trembling, she marched up to the door and opened it. She knew it would
be no use to slam it in his face, so she left it open. She took one arm
out of her coat, paused, rubbed her cheek where his unshaven face had
rasped it. Paul was always spotlessly clean, fresh-shaven when he came.
Why did these two men remind her of each other so? What kind of half-men
were they?

She slung her coat on the end of the divan—an act quite foreign to
habit—and turned to look at Golly, who was teetering toe-to-heel in the
center of the room, staring at her through those narrowed eyes. They
were so like Paul’s, and yet had such a different light.

“Golly,” she said, “I’d like you a lot better if you tried just a little
bit to act like a—a gentleman.”

“Maybe I don’t want you to like me any better.”

“Wh-what?”

“Sure. I don’t want dames tagging along after me.”

“Don’t flatter yourself!” She stopped, confused by her use of the same
phrase she had hurled at Paul. “What do you want?”

He raised his eyebrows interrogatively and lit a cigarette.

“What did you come for? What do you want?”

“Hm. Peevish tonight,” he grunted. He threw his match on the rug and
came toward her. She ducked under his arm and picked up the match. He
did not try to stop her.

She felt suddenly afraid—afraid with no sense of excitement, afraid even
to run from him, because she knew she could never get away.

“You saw Paul the other night.”

She had no denial, could find none, could find no voice for one. Her
eyes were round.

He stepped close to her, stooped a little to look into her face with his
veined-marble gaze, cupping her chin in his hard hand. When he spoke his
voice was soft and very gentle, like Paul’s. “Oh, Sandra, Sanny, I
_told_ you not to see him. I told you! Why did you do it?”

“Golly,” she whispered. “Don’t look at me like that. I—”

He slapped her across the face twice, with the front and back of his
hand. When she raised her arms, he hit her hard in the pit of the
stomach. As she began to sag, his fist crashed into the side of her jaw.
She hurtled backward, struck the divan and slid to the floor.

Golly stood looking at her until he saw a rhythmic pulse in her neck.
“Paul!” he said, and threw a bone-crushing right fist into his left
palm. Then he walked out, leaving the door open.

Sandra lay there for over an hour, though she was not unconscious all
that time. She reeled to her feet presently, with some vague notion of
gong to the telephone. Instead she went up to the bedroom and fell
asleep there.

She dreamed. A horrible thing, in which Paul and Golly circled around
her. Paul was smiling and Golly was grinning and what made it horrible
was that neither of them was all there. They were half-men, sometimes
the top half and sometimes the right and sometimes the left, and where
the real part ended there was blood.

She tossed and screamed, and she burst out laughing and woke herself up.
She rose and showered and went to bed again, sleeping very late.

The next day she called Paul Egan. She spoke urgently, hurriedly, saying
only that she wanted him, needed him. He agreed to come. When he arrived
she was on the porch, waiting. She had been there a long time, looking
down the road, a circle of words running through her mind, losing their
meaning, losing everything but the power of hate they carried. Paul
kills Golly kills Paul kills Golly kills Paul.…

It was dusk when he came. She caught his arm and drew him inside,
reaching back for the switch of the hanging lamp in the foyer.

“You see, Paul? You see?”

He looked at the knobbed discoloration on her cheek and jaw and nodded.
“The scum. The dirty scum. Why did he do it?”

“Because of you, Paul.” She put her face in his shoulder, and his arms
went around her, easily, quietly. “Paul, Paul, he’s going to kill you.”

Paul tightened his arms around her and then pressed her away. He
shrugged out of his coat and hung it on the newel post. “When was he
here?”

“Last night, early.”

“I—had an idea.” She wished she could see his face.

“You had? Paul, why didn’t you come?”

He laughed a little. “Last time I was here you said you wanted no
violence. Remember?”

“Yes. Well—I—got the violence. What are we going to do?”

“Have you any ideas?”

“I want him killed,” she said dully, and cringed as if from herself.
“Paul! I didn’t mean that! I—Oh, I don’t know what I’m saying!”

“Killing him wouldn’t be a way out,” Paul said in a harsh voice. “We’ve
got to—I’ve got—” He clutched his face, rocking his head back and forth.
“If I could only know what he was doing—find out how he—”

“There can’t be a showdown, if that’s what you mean,” she said, coming
to him, comforting him. “He’d be on you like a snake.”

“Oh no. You don’t understand. He wouldn’t work that way, no matter how
direct and violent he seems to you. He’d figure something out cleverly,
set a trap for me. He wouldn’t—do anything to me directly.”

“He’s afraid of you!”

“Perhaps he is,” whispered Paul. His upper lip was wet. “I can’t stand
any more of this, Sandra, I can’t. We’ll have to force his hand. If he
once tries to kill me and fails, I don’t think he’ll ever come back.
It’s as far as he can go.”

“Why? I don’t see why. Why don’t you find him? Why don’t you have him
arrested? What kind of a man are you—” her hand strayed to her bruised
face—“that you can think of waiting for him to make the next move after
_this?_”

He looked at her, and the twisted agony in his eyes wrung something
within her. “Trust me, Sandra. I know what I’m up against. I tell you,
if he tries and fails, you’ll never see him again. I _know_. Trust me.”

She took his hands. “He’ll kill you.”

“I think not. Not if I’m careful. Not if I watch every move I make. I
know how he works. He will set some sort of trap somewhere where I do
something regularly. I must do nothing quite the same until he tries
to—to—Oh, Sandra! Why did this have to happen to you? I love you. You
asked for none of this. Maybe it would be better if I went away and
never—”

She closed his mouth with her hand. “I thought of that, Paul. Maybe I’m
crazy—maybe something’s wrong with me, I don’t know; but nobody, nobody
ever before was willing to risk being killed for me. You could run away
and hide, but you’re sticking to face it—for me. I’m not afraid.”

There were no words in what they had to say to each other after that.

Later, he looked at his watch. “San, can you spend the night in town?
I’ll get a hotel reservation for you. You’ll be quite safe. I’ll have
lunch with you, and dinner, and we’ll go to a show. Then I’ll bring you
back here. He’ll know, you see; and when we get back here tomorrow
night, together, he’ll try. I know him.”

She rose. “You’re sure, Paul?”

“I’m sure.”

She ran to get her bag packed.

He phoned her, anxiously, at bedtime, and again the next morning. They
had lunch together at the Criterion, and dinner at the Sable Antelope,
and took in a show.

In the taxi on the way back to her house, they were tense and silent
until she asked, “You think he will be there?”

He nodded. “He should be. He knows … he must know.”

She moved closer to him, and after a moment said, “Paul, don’t—kill
him.”

“It isn’t likely that I would,” he said gently.

“Don’t. Not for his sake, but—”

He held her close. “I know. I know,” he murmured.

The cab deposited them at the curb and droned away with its life and its
lights. They stood breathless, listening.

“I’m scared,” she whispered. She felt his noiseless chuckle.

“Sure sign you’re normal,” he answered. “Come on.”

She held back, questioning his sudden decisiveness. He bent and kissed
her swiftly, a gesture so tender that again she was joltingly reminded
of Golly’s ruthlessness, and she gasped in terror, feeling Golly so
close.

Paul held the gate open for her, and they tiptoed up the path. She would
have mounted the steps, but he stopped her.

“This is the way we always come,” he reminded her. “We must not do
anything the same. I know him, darling. Some habit-pattern, some little,
usual thing I do—that’s where he’ll ambush me. I _know_, Sandra. Uh—have
you a key to the kitchen door?”

She nodded, and they crept around the house. Once a twig cracked
somewhere, and once a dog howled down the road, and both times they
froze and stood for minutes, their nerves strumming.

“Be funny if Golly wasn’t around here at all,” Paul breathed.

“Oh, he is, I know he is!” Sandra half sobbed. “Oh. I wish we were
inside!”

“Don’t be frightened!” he said, shaking her a little. “As long as you
stay close to me he’ll do nothing. If he wanted to kill you, he’d have
done it the other night. It’s me he’s after. Hurry; open the door.”

The key was annoyingly disobedient in her fingers, but she got the door
open. She pulled him in and away from it and slid the bolt. Then she
turned on the light and screamed at the looming bulk in the corner.

“Silly! It’s just your raincoat!” Paul hissed.

It was, and the reaction was crushing. She clung to him, trembling.

When she had quieted, he spoke. “You’re quite safe now, San. Turn out
the light. I’ll go. No one will see me slip out, it’s so dark. I’ve
outwitted him so far. If I can once get home, I can—lock myself in. But
I wish he tries. I wish he tries to kill me, and fails. If he does, he
will never come back.”

“Oh Paul, I hope you’re right! I hope you know what you’re doing!” she
cried.

“I do, darling. Truly I do. Trust me. And don’t worry. I’ll be careful.
Good night, darling.” He did not attempt to kiss her, and again she had
that suffocating awareness of Golly’s presence.

In the darkness he left her. A blacker piece of blackness, he glided out
to the door and entered the garden.

She reshot the bolt, and ran to the front windows. She could just see
him out there, stepping softly along the edge of the path, on the lawn,
freezing suddenly as the willows rustled in the casual breeze.

After a long while he moved again, reached the gate, and instead of
swinging it wide as he usually did, opened it only enough to let him
slide through. He let it close, leaned back over it, and stared
carefully all around him. Her eyelids strained in sympathy with his.

Then he stood erect, and with the old, endearing gesture, whipped off
his hat and waved it high over his head. She smiled, and three jets of
flame squirted toward him and he fell writhing to the sidewalk, his
agonies drowning out the echoes of the gunshots.

It seemed to Sandra that he choked for a long, long time. Then she was
conscious of the stillness and of the cramped muscles in her cheeks,
holding her smile, and of the other, sharper pain of the long splinter
she had driven under her fingernail when she clutched at the windowsill.

Then she walked to the telephone and called the police, and sat woodenly
in the dark to wait.

There was a fatherly man who asked questions in a soft voice. He had
pointed gray eyebrows, and came after all the others, the ones who took
Paul away and the ones with floodlights and flash-bulbs.

The fatherly man asked her all about Paul and Golly, and how long she
had known them, and how she felt about them, and many questions about
herself. She answered them all, the answers seeming to come only from
the front of her face. She kept her hands over her eyes, and spoke dully
from between the heels of her hands.

When he had stopped his questions, he thought for minutes, silently. She
took her hands down then, and began her own questions.

“Where was he?”

“Who?”

“Golly, of course!”

He looked at her sadly.

“There was no one there but Paul.”

“But the guns—”

“The guns were tied to the trees on each side of the path, and to the
eaves of the house. There were strings from their triggers, knotted
together over the gate. When he waved his hat—”

“He always did that.”

“Of course. He knew that the attempt would be made around some
accustomed action—and he forgot to change that one.”

She tossed her head miserably from side to side. “I don’t understand!”

The kindly man spread his hands.

“You’ve heard about the psychosis that sometimes affects twins, haven’t
you? The thing that makes one feel incomplete as long as the other
exists?”

“I—suppose so.”

“Well, this is just an extension of the same thing.”

“But that’s crazy!”

The man shook his head slightly. “Paul Egan wasn’t exactly all there.”

_“Paul?”_

“Paul, yes. Paul Egan, the man who murdered himself.”

She sprang up. “But it was Golly! It was Golly who killed Paul!”

“Sandra—you don’t mind if I call you Sandra?—can’t I make you
understand? There was only one of them.”

“Oh, no. No. Golly was—”

“—was Paul. Be quiet, now, and listen to me. Paul Egan was what is
called a ‘dissociative personality.’ Some people have three or four very
strong and quite separate personalities. Paul’s divided quite sharply
and completely.”

“But didn’t he know?”

“He knew, all right—but the chances are that he never remembered what he
did when he was Golly.”

“Why didn’t he tell me?” she whispered.

“He loved you, I suppose.”

“Why did he let Golly—why did he take that chance?”

The man shrugged. “I can only guess. From what you tell me, I gather
that he was convinced that ‘Golly’s’ failure in a murder attempt would
be the end of Golly in his life. He probably reasoned that for the
‘Golly’ personality to be caught in an effort to do away with himself
would be such a shock that ‘Golly’ would never return.”

“Golly and Paul,” she murmured. “You’re playing with me!” she flared. “I
don’t believe it. I won’t! I won’t!”

He caught her wrists, pressed her gently back to her chair. “Listen to
me, child. On the guns, on all of Golly’s presents, on the tools that
were used to make the booby-trap, and all over the house, are Paul
Egan’s fingerprints.”

After a while, Sandra believed it.



THE PERFECT HOST


I
As Told By
Ronnie Daniels

I WAS FOURTEEN then. I was sitting in the car waiting for dad to come
out of the hospital. Dad was in there seeing mother. It was the day
after dad told me I had a little sister.

It was July, warm, and I suppose about four in the afternoon. It was
almost time for dad to come out. I half opened the car door and looked
for him.

Someone called, “Mister! Mister!”

There was a red squirrel arcing across the thick green lawn, and a man
with balloons far down the block. I looked at him. Nobody would call me
mister. Nobody ever had, yet. I was too young.

“Mister!”

It was a woman’s voice, but rough; rough and nasty. It was strong, and
horrible for the pleading in it. No strong thing should beg. The sun was
warm, too. The squirrel was not afraid.

The grass was as green and smooth as a jelly bean.

Mother was all right, dad said, and dad felt fine. We would go to the
movies, dad and I, close together with a closeness that never happened
when things were regular, meals at home, mother up making breakfast
every morning, and all that. This week it would be raids on the icebox
and staying up late sometimes, because dad forgot about bedtime and
anyway wanted to talk.

“Mister!”

Her voice was like a dirty mark on a new collar. I looked up.

She was hanging out of a window on the second floor of a near ell of the
hospital. Her hair was dank and stringy, her eyes had mud in them, and
her teeth were beautiful.

She was naked, at least to the waist. She was saying “Mister!” and she
was saying it to me.

I was afraid, then. I got in the car and slammed the door.

“Mister! Mister! Mister!”

They were syllables that meant nothing. A “mis,” a “ter”—sounds that
rasped across the very wound they opened. I put my hands over my ears,
but by then the sounds were inside my head, and my hands just seemed to
keep them there. I think I sobbed. I jumped out of the car and screamed,
“What? What?”

“I got to get out of here,” she moaned.

I thought, why tell me? I thought, what can I do? I had heard of crazy
people, but I had never seen one. Grown-up people were sensible, mostly.
It was only kids who did crazy things, without caring how much sense
they made. I was only fourteen.

“Mister,” she said. “Go to—to.… Let me think, now.… Where I live. Where
I live.”

“Where do you live?” I asked.

“In Homeland,” she said.

She sank down with her forehead on the sill, slowly, as if some big slow
weight were on her shoulderblades. I could see only the top of her head,
the two dank feathers of her hair, and the point of an elbow. Homeland
was a new residential suburb.

“Where in Homeland?” It seemed to be important. To me, I mean, as much
as to her.

“Twenty,” she mumbled. “I have to remember it …” and her voice trailed
off. Suddenly she stood bolt upright, looking back into the room as if
something had happened there. Then she leaned far out.

“Twenty sixty-five,” she snarled. “You hear? Twenty sixty-five. That’s
the one.”

“Ron! Ronnie!”

It was dad, coming down the path, looking at me, looking at the woman.

“That’s the one,” said the woman again.

There was a flurry of white behind her. She put one foot on the sill and
sprang out at me. I closed my eyes. I heard her hit the pavement.

When I opened my eyes they were still looking up at the window. There
was a starched white nurse up there with her fingers in her mouth, all
of them, and eyes as round and blank as a trout’s. I looked down.

I felt dad’s hand on my upper arm. “Ronnie!”

I looked down. There was blood, just a little, on the cuff of my
trousers. There was nothing else.

“Dad.…”

Dad looked all around, on the ground.

He looked up at the window and at the nurse. The nurse looked at dad and
at me, and then put her hands on the sill and leaned out and looked all
around on the ground. I could see, in the sunlight, where her fingers
were wet from being in her mouth.

Dad looked at me and again at the nurse, and I heard him draw a deep
quivering breath as if he’d forgotten to breathe for a while and had
only just realized it. The nurse straightened up, put her hands over her
eyes and twisted back into the room.

Dad and I looked at each other. He said, “Ronnie—what was—what …” and
then licked his lips.

I was not as tall as my father, though he was not a tall man. He had
thin, fine obedient hair, straight and starting high. He had blue eyes
and a big nose and his mouth was quiet. He was broad and gentle and
close to the ground, close to the earth.

I said, “How’s mother?”

Dad gestured at the ground where something should be, and looked at me.
Then he said, “We’d better go, Ron.”

I got into the car. He walked around it and got in and started it, and
then sat holding the wheel, looking back at where we had been standing.
There was still nothing there. The red squirrel, with one cheek puffed
out, came bounding and freezing across the path.

I asked again how mother was.

“She’s fine. Just fine. Be out soon. And the baby. Just fine.” He looked
back carefully for traffic, shifted and let in the clutch. “Good as
new,” he said.

I looked back again. The squirrel hopped and arched and stopped, sitting
on something. It sat on something so that it was perhaps ten inches off
the ground, but the thing it sat on couldn’t be seen. The squirrel put
up its paws and popped a chestnut into them from its cheek, and put its
tail along its back with the big tip curled over like a fern front, and
began to nibble. Then I couldn’t see any more.

After a time dad said, “What happened there just as I came up?”

I said, “What happened? Nothing. There was a squirrel.”

“I mean, uh, up at the window.”

“Oh, I saw a nurse up there.”

“Yes, the nurse.” He thought for a minute. “Anything else?”

“No. What are you going to call the baby?”

He looked at me strangely. I had to ask him again about the baby’s name.

“I don’t know yet,” he said distantly. “Any ideas?”

“No, Dad.”

We rode along for quite a while without saying anything. A little frown
came and went between dad’s eyes, the way it did when he was figuring
something out, whether it was a definition at charades, or an income tax
report, or a problem of my school algebra.

“Dad. You know Homeland pretty well, don’t you?”

“I should. Our outfit agented most of those sites. Why?”

“Is there a Homeland Street, or a Homeland Avenue out there?”

“Not a one. The north and south ones are streets, and are named after
trees. The east and west ones are avenues, and are named after flowers.
All alphabetical. Why?”

“I just wondered. Is there a number as high as twenty sixty-five?”

“Not yet, though I hope there will be some day … unless it’s a telephone
number. Why, Ron? Where did you get that number?”

“I dunno. Just thought of it. Just wondered. Where are we going to eat?”

We went to the Bluebird.

I suppose I knew then what had gotten into me when the woman jumped; but
I didn’t think of it, any more than a redhead goes around thinking to
himself “I have red hair” or a taxi-driver says to himself “I drive a
cab.”

I knew, that’s all. I just knew. I knew the _purpose_, too, but didn’t
think of it, any more than a man thinks and thinks of the place where he
works, when he’s on his way to work in the morning.

II
As Told By
Benton Daniels

RONNIE’S NOT AN unusual boy. Oh, maybe a little quieter than most, but
it takes all kinds. He’s good in school, but not brilliant; averages in
the low eighties, good in music and English and history, weak in math,
worse in science than he could be if he cared a little bit more about
it.

That day when we left the hospital grounds, though, there was something
unusual going on. Yes, sir. I couldn’t make head nor tail of it, and I
must say I still can’t.

Sometimes I think it’s Ronnie, and sometimes I think it was something
temporarily wrong with me. I’m trying to get it all straight in my mind,
right from the start.

I had just seen Clee and the baby. Clee looked a little tired, but her
color was wonderful. The baby looked like a baby—that is, like a little
pink old man, but I told Clee she was beautiful and takes after her
mother, which she will be and do, of course, when she gets some meat on
her bones.

I came along the side path from the main entrance, toward where the car
was parked. Ronnie was waiting for me there. I saw him as I turned
toward the road, just by the north building.

Ronnie was standing by the car, with one foot on the running board, and
he seemed to be talking with somebody in the second-floor window. I
called out to him, but he didn’t hear. Or he paid no attention. I looked
up, and saw someone in the window. It was a woman, with a crazy face. I
remember an impression of very regular white teeth, and scraggly hair. I
don’t think she had any clothes on.

I was shocked, and then I was very angry. I thought, here’s some poor
sick person gone out of her mind, and she’ll maybe mark Ronnie for life,
standing up there like that and maybe saying all sorts of things.

I ran to the boy, and just as I reached him, the woman jumped. I think
someone came into the room behind her.

Now, look. I distinctly heard that woman’s body hit. It was a terrible
sound. And I remember feeling a wave of nausea just then, but for some
reason I was sure then, and I’m sure now, that it had nothing to do with
the thing I saw. That kind of shock-nausea only hits a person after the
shock, not before or during. I don’t even know why I think of this at
all. It’s just something I feel sure about, that’s all.

I heard her body hit. I don’t know whether I followed her body down with
my eyes or not. There wasn’t much time for that; she didn’t fall more
than twenty-five, maybe twenty-eight feet.

I heard the noise, and I when I looked down—_there wasn’t anything
there!_

I don’t know what I thought then. I don’t know if a man does actually
_think_ at a time like that. I know I looked all around, looking for a
hole in the ground or maybe a sheet of camouflage or something which
might be covering the body. It was too hard to accept that
disappearance. They say that a dog doesn’t bother with its reflection in
a mirror because he can’t smell it, and he believes his nose rather than
his eyes. Humans aren’t like that, I guess. When your brain tells you
one thing and your eyes another, you just don’t know what to believe.

I looked back up at the window, perhaps thinking I’d been mistaken, that
the woman would still be up there.

She was gone, all right. There was a nurse up there instead, looking
down, terrified.

I returned to Ronnie and started to ask him what had happened. I stopped
when I saw his face. It wasn’t shocked, or surprised, or anything. Just
relaxed. He asked me how his mother was.

I said she was fine. I looked at his face and marveled that it showed
nothing of the horrible thing that had happened. It wasn’t blank, mind
you. It was just as if nothing had occurred at all, or as if the thing
had been wiped clean out of his memory.

I thought at the moment that that was a blessing, and, with one more
glance at the window—the nurse had gone—I went to the car and got in.
Ronnie sat next to me. I started the car, then looked back at the path.
There was nothing there.

I suppose the reaction hit me then—that, or the thought that I had had a
hallucination. If I had, I was naturally worried. If I had not, what had
happened to Ronnie?

I drove off, finally. Ronnie made some casual small talk; I questioned
him about the thing, carefully, but he seemed honestly to know nothing
about it. I decided to let well enough alone, at least for the time
being.…

We had a quick dinner at the Bluebird, and then went home. I suppose I
was poor company for the boy, because I kept finding myself mulling over
the thing. We went to the Criterion, and I don’t believe I heard or saw
a bit of it. Then we picked up an evening paper and went home. He went
to bed while I sat up with the headlines.

I found it at the bottom of the third page. This is the item:

WOMAN DIES IN HOSPITAL LEAP

Mrs. Helmuth Stoye, of Homeland, was found yesterday afternoon under her
window at Memorial Hospital, Carstairs. Dr. R.B. Knapp, head physician
at the hospital, made a statement to the press in which he absolved the
hospital and staff from any charges of negligence. A nurse, whose name
is withheld, had just entered Mrs. Stoye’s room when the woman leaped to
her death.

“There was no way to stop her,” said Dr. Knapp. “It happened too fast.”

Dr. Knapp said that Mrs. Stoye had shown known signs of depression or
suicidal intent on admission to the hospital. Her specific illness was
not divulged.

Mrs. Stoye, the former Grace Korshak of Ferntree, is survived by her
husband, a well-known printer here.

I went straight to the telephone and dialed the hospital. I heard the
ringing signal once, twice, and then, before the hospital could answer,
I hung up again. What could I ask them or tell them? “I saw Mrs. Stoye
jump.” They’d be interested in that, all right. Then what? “She
disappeared when she hit the ground.” I can imagine what they’d say to
that. “But my son saw it too!” and the questions from hospital
officials, a psychiatrist or two.… Ronnie being questioned, after he had
mercifully forgotten about the whole thing … no. No; better let well
enough alone.

The newspaper said Mrs. Stoye was found under her window. Whoever found
her must have been able to see her.

_I wonder what the nurse saw?_

I went into the kitchen and heated some coffee, poured it, sweetened it,
stirred it, and then left it untasted while I put on my hat and got my
car keys.

I had to see that nurse. First I tore out the newspaper article—I didn’t
want Ronnie ever to see it.

III
As Told By
Lucille Holder

I HAVE SEEN a lot of ugly things as a trainee and as a nurse, but they
don’t bother me very much. It’s not that the familiarity hardens one; it
rather that one learns the knack of channeling one’s emotions around the
ugly thing.

When I was a child in England I learned how to use this knack. I lived
in Coventry, and though Herr Hitler’s treatment of the city seems to
have faded from the news and from fiction, the story is still vividly
written on the memories of us who were there, and is read and reread
more often than we care to say.

You can’t know what this means until you know the grim happiness that
the chap you’ve dug out of the ruins is a dead ’un, for the ones who
still live horrify you so.

So—one gets accustomed to the worst. Further, one is prepared when a
worse “worst” presents itself.

And I suppose that it was this very preparation which found me jolly
well unprepared for what happened when Mrs. Stoye jumped out of her
window.

There were two things happening from the instant I opened her door. One
thing was what I did, and the other thing was what I felt.

These are the things I did:

I stepped into the room, carrying a washing tray on my arm. Everything
seemed in order, except, of course, that Mrs. Stoye was out of bed. That
didn’t surprise me; she was ambulant. She was over by the window; I
suppose I glanced around the room before I looked directly at her.

When I saw her pajama top lying on the bedclothes I looked at her,
though.

She straightened up suddenly as she heard me, barked something about
“That’s the one!” and jumped—dived, rather—right out. It wasn’t too much
of a drop, really—less than thirty feet, I’d say, but she went down head
first, and I knew instantly that she hadn’t a chance.

I can’t remember setting down the washing tray; I saw it later on the
bed. I must have spun around and set it there and rushed to the window.

I looked down, quite prepared for the worst, as I’ve said.

But what I saw was so terribly much worse than it should have been. I
mean, an ill person is a bad thing to see, and an accident can be worse,
and burn cases, I think, are worst of all. The thing is, these all get
worse in one direction. One simply cannot be prepared for something
which is bad in a totally unexpected, impossible way.

There was nothing down there at all. Nothing. I saw Mrs. Stoye jump out,
ran to the window, it couldn’t have been more than three seconds later;
and there was nothing there.

But I’m saying now how I felt. I mean to say first what I did, because
the two are so different, from this point on.

I looked down; there was no underbrush, no flowerbed, nothing which
could have concealed her had she rolled. There were some people—a stocky
man and a young boy, perhaps fourteen or fifteen—standing nearby. The
man seemed to be searching the ground as I was; I don’t remember what
the boy was doing. Just standing there. The man looked up at me; he
looked badly frightened. He spoke to the boy, who answered quietly, and
then they moved off together to the road.

I looked down once more, still could not see Mrs. Stoye, and turned and
ran to the signal-button.

I rang it and then rushed out into the hall. I must have looked very
distraught.

I ran right into Dr. Knapp, all but knocking him over, and gasped out
that Mrs. Stoye had jumped.

Dr. Knapp was terribly decent. He led me back into the room and told me
to sit down. Then he went to the window, looked down and grunted. Miss
Flaggon came in just then. I was crying.

Dr. Knapp told her to get a stretcher and a couple of orderlies and take
them outside, under this window. She asked no questions, but fled; when
Dr. Knapp gives orders in that voice, people jump to it. Dr. Knapp ran
out, calling me to stay where I was until he came back. In spite of the
excitement, he actually managed to make his voice gentle.

I went to the window after a moment and looked down. Two medical
students were running across the lawn from the south building, and the
orderlies with their stretcher, still rolled, were pelting down the
path. Dr. Knapp, bag in hand, was close behind them.

Dr. Carstairs and Dr. Greenberg were under the window and already
shunting away the few curious visitors who had appeared as if from out
of the ground, the way people do after an accident anywhere. But most
important of all, I saw Mrs. Stoye’s body. It was lying crumpled up,
directly below me, and there was no doubt of it that her neck was broken
and her skull badly fractured. I went and sat down again.

Afterward Dr. Knapp questioned me closely and, I must say, very kindly.
I told him nothing about the strange disappearance of the body. I expect
he thought I was crying because I felt responsible for the death. He
assured me that my record was in my favor, and it was perfectly
understandable that I was helpless to stop Mrs. Stoye.

I apparently went quite to pieces then, and Dr. Knapp suggested that I
take my two weeks’ leave—it was due in another twenty days in any
case—immediately, and rest up and forget this thing.

I said, “Perhaps I will.”

I went out to the Quarters to bathe and change. And now I had better say
how I _felt_ during all this.…

I was terrified when Mrs. Stoye jumped. When I reached the window right
afterward, I was exactly as excited as one might expect.

But the instant I looked down, something happened. It wasn’t anything I
can describe, except to say that there was a change of attitude. That
doesn’t seem to mean much, does it? Well, I can only say this; that from
that moment I was no longer frightened nor shocked nor horrified nor
anything else. I remember putting my hands up to my mouth, and must have
given a perfect picture of a terrified nurse.

I was actually quite calm. I was quite cool as I ran to the bell and
then out into the hall. I collapsed, I cried, I sobbed, I produced a
flood of tears and streaks for my face. But during every minute of it I
was completely calm.

Now, I knew that was strange, but I felt no surprise at it. I knew that
it could be called dishonest. I don’t know how to analyze it. I am a
nurse, and a profound sense of duty has been drilled into me for years.
I felt that it was my duty to cry, to say nothing about the
disappearance of the body, to get two weeks’ leave immediately, and to
do the other things which I have done and must do.

While I bathed I thought. I was still calm, and I suppose I behaved
calmly; it didn’t matter, for there was no one to see.

Two people had seen Mrs. Stoye jump beside myself. I realized that I
must see them. I didn’t think about the disappearing body. I didn’t feel
I had to, somehow, any more than one thinks consciously of the water in
the pipes and heaters as one draws a bath. The thing was there, and
needed no investigation.

But it was necessary to see that man and the boy. What I must do when I
saw them required no thought either. That seemed all arranged,
unquestionable, so evident that it needed no thought or definition.

I put away the white stockings and shoes with a feeling of relief, and
slipped into underthings with a bit of lace on them, and sheer hose. I
put on my wine rayon with the gored skirt, and the matching shoes. I
combed my hair out and put it up in a roll around the back, cool and out
of the way. Money, keys, cigarette case, knife, lighter, compact. All
ready.

I went round by the administration offices, thinking hard. A man visits
the hospital with his boy—it was probably his boy—and leaves the boy
outside while he goes in. He would be seeing a wife, in all probability.
He’d leave the boy outside only if the woman’s condition was serious or
if she were immediately post-operative or post-partum.

So many patients go in and out that I naturally don’t remember too many
of them; on the other hand, I can almost always tell a new patient or
visitor … marvelous the way the mind, unbidden, clocks and catalogs, to
some degree, all that passes before it.…

The chances were that these people, the man and the boy, were visiting a
new patient. Maternity would be as good a guess as any, to start with.

It was well after nine o’clock, the evening of Mrs. Stoye’s death, and
the administration offices were deserted except for Miss Kaye, the night
registrar. It was not unusual for nurses to check up occasionally on
patients. I nodded to Miss Kaye and went back to the files. The
maternity admission file gave me five names for the previous two days. I
got the five cards of of the patients’ alphabetical and glanced over
them. Two of these new mothers had other children; a Mrs. Korff, with
three sons and a daughter at home, and a Mrs. Daniels who had one son.
Here: “Previous children: One. Age this date: 14 yrs. 3 months.” And
further down: “Father age: 41.”

It looked like a bull’s eye. I remember feeling inordinately pleased
with myself, as if I had assisted particularly well in an operation, or
had done a bang-up job of critical first-aid.

I copied down the address of the Daniels family, and, carefully
replacing all the cards, made my vacation checkout and left the
building.

It seemed late to go calling, but I knew that I must. There had been a
telephone number on the card, but I had ignored it. What I must do could
not be done over the phone.

I found the place fairly easily, although it was a long way out in the
suburbs on the other side of the town. It was a small,
comfortable-looking place, set well back from the road, and with wide
lawns and its own garage. I stepped up on the porch and quite
shamelessly looked inside.

The outer door opened directly into the living room, without a foyer.
There was a plate-glass panel in the door with a sheer curtain on the
inside. I could see quite clearly. The room was not too large—fireplace,
wainscoting, stairway in the left corner, big easy chairs, a studio
couch—that sort of thing. There was a torn newspaper tossed on the arm
of one fireside chair. Two end table lamps were lit. There was no one in
the room.

I rang the bell, waited, rang again, peering in. Soon I saw a movement
on the stairs. It was the boy, thin-looking and tousled, thumping down
the carpeted steps, tying the cord of a dark-red dressing gown as he
came. On the landing he stopped.

I could just hear him call “Dad!” He leaned over the bannister, looking
up and back. He called again, shrugged a shrug which turned into a
stretch, and, yawning, came to the door. I hid the knife in my sleeve.

“Oh!” he said, startled, as he opened the door. Unaccountably, I felt a
wave of nausea. Getting a grip on myself, I stepped inside before I
spoke. He stood looking at me, flushing, a bit conscious, I think, of
his bare feet, for he stood on one of them, trying to curl the toes of
the other one out of sight.

“Daniels.…” I murmured.

“Yes,” he said, “I’m Ronald Daniels.” He glanced quickly into the room.
“Dad doesn’t seem to be … I don’t … I was asleep.”

“I’m so sorry.”

“Gosh, that’s all right,” he said. He was a sweet little chap, not a man
yet, not a child—less and less of a child as he woke up, which he was
doing slowly. He smiled. “Come in. Let me have your coat. Dad ought to
be here now. Maybe he went for cigarettes or something.”

It was as if a switch had been thrown and a little sign had lit up
within him—“Remember your manners.”

Abruptly I felt the strangest compulsion—a yearning, a warming toward
this lad. It was completely a sexual thing, mind you—completely. But it
was as if a part of me belonged to a part of him … no; more the other
way round. I don’t know. It can’t be described. And with the feeling, I
suddenly knew that it was all right, it was all quite all right.

I did not have to see Mr. Daniels after all. That business would be well
taken care of when the time came, and not by me. Better—much better—for
him to do it.

He extended his hand for my coat. “Thank you _so_ much,” I said,
smiling, liking him—more than liking him, in this indefinable way—“but I
really must go. I—if your father—” How could I say it? How could I let
him know that it was different now; that everything might be spoiled if
his father knew I had come here? “I mean, when your father comes back.…”

Startlingly, he laughed. “Please don’t worry,” he said. “I won’t tell
him you were here.”

I looked at his face, his round, bland face, so odd with his short
slender frame. That thing like a sense of duty told me not to ask, but I
violated it. “You don’t know who I am, do you?”

He shook his head. “Not really. But it doesn’t matter. I won’t tell
dad.”

“Good.” I smiled, and left.

IV
As Told By
Jennie Beaufort

YOU NEVER KNOW what you’re going to run up against when you’re an
information operator, I mean really, people seem to have the craziest
idea of what we’re there for. Like the man called up the other day and
wanted to know how you spell conscientious—“Just conscientious,” he
says, “I know how to spell objector,” and I gave him the singsong, you
know, the voice with a smile, “I’m soreee! We haven’t that
_informay_—shun!” and keyed him out, thinking to myself, what a schmoe.
(I told Mr. Parker, he’s my super, and he grinned and said it was a sign
of the times; Mr. Parker’s always making jokes.) And like the other man
wants to know if he gets a busy signal and hangs on to the line, will
the signal stop and the bell ring when the party he is calling hangs up.

I want to say to him, what do you think I am, Alexander Graham Bell or
something, maybe Don Ameche, instead of which I tell him, “One moment,
sir, and I will get that information for you?” (not that I’m asking a
question, you raise your voice that way because it leaves the customers
breathless) and I nudge Sue and she tells me, Sue knows everything.

Not that everything like that comes over the wire, anything is liable to
happen right there in the office or in the halls to say nothing of the
stage-door Johnnies with hair oil and cellophane boxes who ask all the
girls if they are Operator 23, she has such a nice voice.

Like the kid that was in here yesterday, not that he was on the prowl,
he was too young, though five years from now he’ll be just dreamy, with
his cute round face and his long legs. Mr. Parker brought him in to me
and told me the kid was getting up a talk for his civics class in high
school, and tells the kid to just ask Miss Beaufort anything he wants to
know and walks off rubbing his hands, which I can understand because he
has made me feel good and made the kid feel good and has me doing all
the work while he gets all the credit.

Not that I felt good just at that particular moment, my stomach did a
small flip-flop, but that has nothing to do with it; it must have been
the marshmallow cake I had for my lunch, I should remember to keep away
from the marshmallow when I have gravy-and-mashed, at least on weekdays.

Anyway this kid was cute, with his pleases and his thank you’s and his
little almost bows-from-the-waist like a regular Lord Calvert. He asked
me all sorts of questions and all smart too, but he never asked them
right out, I mean, he would say, “Please tell me how you can find a
number so _fast?_” and then listen to every word I said and squiggle
something down in his notebook. I showed him the alphabeticals and the
central indexes and the assonance file (and you can bet I called it by
its full name to that nice youngster) where we find out that a number
for Meyer, say, is listed as Maior. And he wanted to know why it was
that we never give a street address to someone who has the phone number,
but only the other way around, and how we found out the phone number
from just the street address.

So I showed him the street index and the checking index, which has the
numbers all in order by exchanges with the street addresses, which is
what we use to trace calls when we have to. And lots more. And finally
he said he wanted to pretend he was me for a minute, to see if he
understood everything. He even blushed when he said it. I told him to go
ahead and got up and let him sit down. He sat there all serious and
bright-eyed, and said, “Now, suppose I am you, and someone wants to know
the number of—uh—Fred Zimmerman, who lives out at Bell Hill, but they
have no street number.”

And I showed him how to flip out the alphabetical, and how to ask the
customer which one he wants if there should be more than one Fred
Zimmerman. He listened so carefully and politely, and make a note in his
book. Then he asked me what happens of the police or somebody has a
phone number and wants the address, we’ll say, out in Homeland, like
Homeland 2050. I showed him the numerical index, and whipped it out and
opened it like an old hand. My, he caught on quickly. He made another
note in his book … well, it went on like that, and all in twenty
minutes.

I bet he could take over from me any time and not give Mr. Parker a
minute’s worry, which is more than I can say for some of the girls who
have been working here for years, like that Patty Mawson with her blonde
hair and her awful New Look.

Well, that boy picked my brains dry in short order, and he got up and
for a moment I thought he was going to kiss my hand like a Frenchman or
a European, but he didn’t. He just thanked me as if had given him the
crown jewels or my hand in marriage, and went out to do the same for Mr.
Parker, and all I can say is, I wish one-tenth of the customers showed
as much good house-breaking.

V
As Told By
Helmuth Stoye

Grace … Grace … _Grace!_

Oh, my little darling, my gentle, my soft little bird with the husky
voice. Miss Funny-Brows. Little Miss Teeth. You used to laugh such a
special laugh when I made up new names for you, Coral-cache, Cadenza,
Viola-voice … and you’ll never laugh again, because I killed you.

I killed you, I killed you.

Yesterday I stopped all the clocks.

I couldn’t stand it. It was wrong; it was a violation. You were dead. I
drew the blinds and sat in the dark, not really believing that it had
happened—how _could_ it happen? You’re _Grace_, you’re the humming in
the kitchen, the quick footfalls in the foyer as I come up the porch
steps.

I think for a while I believed that your coming back was the most real,
the most obvious thing; in a moment, any moment, you would come in and
kiss the nape of my neck; you would be smelling of vanilla and cut
flowers, and you’d laugh at me and together we’d fling up the blinds and
let in the light.

And then Tinkle struck—Tinkle, the eight-foot grandfather’s clock with
the _basso profundo_ chime. That was when I knew what was real. It was
real that you were dead, it was real.…

I got angry at that violation, that sacrilege, that clock. What right
had the clock to strike, the hands to move? How could it go on? It was
wrong. I got up and stopped it. I think I spoke to it, not harshly,
angry as I was; I said, “You don’t know, do you, Tinkle? No one’s told
you yet,” and I caught it by its swinging neck and held it until its
ticking brain was quiet.

I told all the clocks, one by one, that you were dead—the glowing Seth
Thomas ship’s clock, with its heavy threads and its paired syllables,
and Drowsy the alarm, and the cuckoo with the cleft palate who couldn’t
say anything but “hook-who!”

A truck roared by outside, and I remember the new surge of fury because
of it, and then the thought that the driver hadn’t been told yet … and
then the mad thought that the news would spread from these silent
clocks, from these drawn blinds, spread like a cloud-shadow over the
world, and when it touched birds, they would glide to the ground and
crouch motionless, with no movement in their jeweled eyes; when it
touched machines they would slow and stop; when it touched flowers they
would close themselves into little soft fists and bend to knuckle the
earth; when it touched people they would finish that stride, end that
sentence, slowing, softening, and would sink down and be still.

There would be no noise or confusion as the world slipped into its
stasis, and nothing would grow but silence. And the sun would hang on
the horizon with its face thickly veiled, and there would be eternal
dusk.

That was yesterday, and I was angry. I am not angry today. It was
better, yesterday, the sitting in turmoil and uselessness, the useless
raging up and down rooms so hollow, yet still so full of you they would
not echo. It got dark, you see, and in good time the blinds were
brighter than the walls around them again. I looked out, squinting
through grainy eyelids, and saw a man walking by, walking easily, his
hands in his pockets, and he was whistling.

After that I could not be angry any more, not at the man, not at the
morning. I knew only the great cruel pressure of a fact, a fact worse
than the fact of emptiness or of death—the fact that nothing ever stops,
that things must go on.

It was better to be angry, and to lose myself in uselessness. Now I am
not angry and I have no choice but to think usefully. I have lived a
useful life and have built it all on useful thinking, and if I had not
thought so much and so carefully Grace would be here with me now, with
her voice like a large soft breeze in some springtime place, and perhaps
tickling the side of my neck with feather-touches of her moving
lips … it was my useful, questing, thirsty thought which killed her,
killed her.

The accident was all of two years ago—almost two years anyway. We had
driven all the way back from Springfield without stopping, and we were
very tired. Grace and Mr. Share and I were squeezed into the front seat.

Mr. Share was a man Grace had invented long before, even before we were
married. He was a big invisible fat man who always sat by the right-hand
window, and always looked out to the side so that he never watched us.

But since he was so fat, Grace had to press up close to me as we drove.

There was a stake-bodied truck bowling along ahead of us, and in the
back of it was a spry old man, or perhaps a weatherbeaten young man—you
couldn’t tell—in blue dungarees and a red shirt. He had a yellow woolen
muffler tied around his waist, and the simple strip of material made all
the difference between “clothes” and “costume.”

Behind him, lashed to the bed of the truck just back of the cab, was a
large bundle of burlap. It would have made an adequate seat for him,
cushioned and out of the wind. But the man seemed to take the wind as a
heady beverage and the leaping floor as a challenge.

He stood with his arms away from his sides and his knees slightly
flexed, and rode the truck as if it were a live thing. He yielded
himself to each lurch and bump, brought himself back with each
recession, guarding his equilibrium with an easy virtuosity.

Grace was, I think, dozing; my shout of delighted laughter at the
performance on the bounding stage before us brought her upright. She
laughed with me for the laugh alone, for she had not looked through the
windshield yet, and she kissed my cheek.

He saw her do it, the man on the truck, and he laughed with us.

“He’s _our_ kind of people,” Grace said.

“A pixie,” I agreed, and we laughed again.

The man took off an imaginary plumed hat, swung it low toward us, but
very obviously toward Grace. She nodded back to him, with a slight
sidewise turn of her face as it went down that symbolized a curtsey.

Then he held out his elbow, and the pose, the slightly raised shoulder
over which he looked fondly at the air over his bent arm, showed that he
had given his arm to a lady. The lady was Grace, who, of course, would
be charmed to join him in the dance … she clapped her hands and crowed
with delight, as she watched her imaginary self with the courtly,
colorful figure ahead.

The man stepped with dainty dignity to the middle of the truck and bowed
again, and you could all but hear the muted minuet as it began. It was a
truly wonderful thing to watch, this pantomime; the man knew the ancient
stately steps to perfection, and they were unflawed by the careening
surface on which they were performed. There was no mockery in the
miming, but simply the fullness of good, the sheer, unspoiled sharing of
a happy magic.

He bowed, took her hand, smiled back into her eyes as she pirouetted
behind him. He stood back to the line waiting his turn, nodding slightly
to the music; he dipped ever so little, twice, as his turn came, and
stepped gracefully out to meet her, smiling again.

I don’t know what made me look up. We were nearing the Speedway Viaduct,
and the truck ahead was just about to pass under it. High up over our
heads was the great span, and as my eyes followed its curve, to see the
late afternoon sun on the square guard posts which bounded the elevated
road, three of the posts exploded outward, and the blunt nose of a heavy
truck plowed through and over the edge, to slip and catch and slip
again, finally to teeter to a precarious stop.

Apparently its trailer was loaded with light steel girders; one of them
slipped over the tractor’s crumpled shoulder and speared down toward us.

Our companion of the minuet, on the truck ahead, had finished his dance,
turned to us, was bowing low, smiling, looking up through his eyebrows
at us. The girder’s end took him on the back of the head. It did not
take the head off; it obliterated it. The body struck flat and lay
still, as still as wet paper stuck to glass. The girder bit a large
piece out of the tailgate and somersaulted to the right, while I braked
and swerved dangerously away from it. Fortunately, there were no cars
coming toward us.

There was, of course, a long, mixed-up, horrified sequence of the two
truck drivers, the one ahead and the one who came down later from the
viaduct and was sick. Ambulances and bystanders and a lot of talk … none
of it matters, really.

No one ever found out who the dead man was. He had no luggage and no
identification; he had over ninety dollars in his pocket. He might have
been anybody—someone from show business, or a writer perhaps, on a
haywire vacation of his own devising. I suppose that doesn’t matter
either. What does matter is that he died while Grace was in a very close
communication with what he was doing, and her mind was wide open for his
fantasy. Mine is, generally, I suppose; but at that particular moment,
when I had seen the smash above and the descending girder, I was wide
awake, on guard. I think that had a lot to do with what has happened
since. I think it has everything to do with Grace’s—with Grace’s—

There is no word for it. I can say this, though. Grace and I were never
alone together again until the day she died. Died, died, Grace is dead.

_Grace!_

I can go on with my accursed useful thinking now, I suppose.

Grace was, of course, badly shaken, and I did what I could for her over
the next few weeks. I tried my best to understand how it was affecting
her. (That’s what I mean by useful thinking—trying to understand. Trying
and trying—prying and prying. Arranging, probing, finding out. Getting a
glimpse, a scent of danger, rooting it out—bringing it out into the open
where it can get at you.) Rest and new clothes and alcohol rubdowns; the
theater, music and music, always music, for she could lose herself in
it, riding its flux, feeling and folding herself in it, following it,
sometimes, with her hushed, true voice, sometimes lying open to it,
letting it play its colors and touches over her.

There is always an end to patience, however. After two months, knowing
her as I did, I knew there was more here than simple shock. If I had
known her less well—if I had cared less, even, it couldn’t have
mattered.

It began with small things. There were abstractions which were unusual
in so vibrant a person. In a quiet room, her face would listen to music;
sometimes I had to speak twice and then repeat what I had said.

Once I came home and found supper not started, the bed not made. Those
things were not important—I am not a fusspot nor an autocrat; but I was
shaken when, after calling her repeatedly I found her in the guest room,
sitting on the bed without lights. I had no idea she was in there; I
just walked in and snapped on the light in the beginnings of panic
because she seemed not to be in the house; she had not answered me.

And at first it was as if she had not noticed the sudden yellow blaze
from the paired lamps; she was gazing at the wall, and on her face was
an expression of perfect peace. She was wide awake—at least her eyes
were. I called her: “Grace!”

“Hello, darling,” she said quietly. Her head turned casually toward me
and she smiled—oh, those perfect teeth of hers!—and her smile was only
partly for me; the rest of it was inside, with the nameless things with
which she had been communing.

I sat beside her, amazed, and took her hands. I suppose I spluttered a
bit, “Grace, are you all right? Why didn’t you answer? The bed’s
not—have you been out? What’s happened? Here—let me see if you have a
fever?”

Her eyes were awake, yes; but not awake to me, to here and now. They
were awake and open to some _elsewhere_ matters.… She acquiesced as I
felt her forehead and cheeks for fever, and while I was doing it I could
see the attention of those warm, pleased living eyes shifting from the
things they had been seeing, to me. It was as if they were watching a
scene fade out while another was brought in on a screen, so that for a
second all focusing points on the first picture were lost, and there was
a search for a focusing point on the second.

And then, apparently, the picture of Helmuth Stoye sitting next to her,
holding one of her hands, running his right palm across her forehead and
down her cheek, came into sharp, true value, and she said, “Darling!
You’re home! What happened? Holiday or strike? You’re not sick?”

I said, “Sweetheart, it’s after seven.”

“No!” She rose, smoothed her hair in front of the mirror. Hers was a
large face and her appeal had none of the doll qualities, the
candy-and-peaches qualities of the four-color ads. Her brow and
cheekbones were wide and strong, and the hinges of her jaw were
well-marked, hollowed underneath. Her nostrils were flared and
sensuously tilted and her shoulders too wide to be suitable for fashion
plates or pinups. But clothes hung from those shoulders with the
graceful majesty of royal capes, and her breasts were large, high,
separated and firm.

Yet for all her width and flatness and strength, for all her
powerfully-set features, she was woman all through; and with clothes or
without, she looked it.

She said, “I had no idea … after seven! Oh, darling, I’m sorry. You poor
thing, and no dinner yet. Come help me,” and she dashed out of the room,
leaving me flapping my lips, calling, “But Grace! Wait! Tell me first
what’s the mat—”

And when I got to the kitchen she was whipping up a dinner, efficiently,
deftly, and all my questions could wait, could be interrupted with
“Helmuth, honey, open these, will you?” “I don’t know, b’loved; we’ll
dig it out after supper. Will you see if there’re any French fries in
the freezer?”

And afterward she remembered that _The Pearl_ was playing at the Ascot
Theater, and we’d missed it when it first came to town, and this was the
best night … we went, and the picture was fine, and we talked of nothing
else that night.

I could have forgotten about that episode, I suppose. I could have
forgotten about any one of them—the time she turned her gaze so
strangely inward when she was whipping cream, and turned it to butter
because she simply forgot to stop whipping it when it was ready; the
times she had the strong, uncharacteristic urges to do and feel things
which had never interested her before—to lose herself in the distances
from high buildings and tall hills, to swim underwater for long,
frightening minutes; to hear new and ever newer kinds of
music—saccharine fox-trots and atonal string quartets, arrangements for
percussion alone and Oriental modes.

And foods—rattlesnake ribs, moo goo gai pan, curried salmon with green
rice, _Paella_, with its chicken and clams, headcheese, _cannoli_,
sweet-and-pungent pork; all these Grace made herself, and well.

But in food as in music, in new sensualities as in new activities, there
was no basic change in Grace. These were additions only; for all the
exoticism of the dishes, for example, we still had and enjoyed the
things she had always made—the gingered leg of lamb, the acorn squash
filled with creamed onions, the crêpes suzettes.

She could still be lost in the architecture of Bach’s “Passacaglia and
Fugue” and in the raw heartbeat of the Hagard-Bauduc “Big Noise from
Winnetka.” Because she had this new passion for underwater swimming, she
did not let it take from her enjoyment of highboard diving. Her
occasional lapses from efficiency, as in the whipped cream episode, were
rare and temporary. Her sometime dreaminess, when she would forget
appointments and arrangements and time itself, happened so seldom, that
in all justice, they could have been forgotten, or put down, with all my
vaunted understanding, to some obscure desire for privacy, for
aloneness.

So—she had everything she had always had, and now more. She was
everything she always had been, and now more. She did everything had
always done, and now more. Then what, what on earth and in heaven, was I
bothered, worried, and—and afraid of?

I know now. It was jealousy. It was—one of the jealousies.

There wasn’t Another Man. That kind of poison springs from
insecurity—from the knowledge that there’s enough wrong with you that
the chances are high that another man—any other man—could do a better
job than you in some department of your woman’s needs. Besides, that
kind of thing can never be done by the Other Man alone; your woman must
cooperate, willfully and consciously, or it can’t happen. And Grace was
incapable of that.

No; it was because of the sharing we had had. My marriage was a magic
one because of what we shared; because of our ability to see a red gold
leaf, exchange a glance and say never a word, for we knew so well each
other’s pleasure, its causes and expressions and associations. The
pleasures were not the magic; the sharing was.

A poor analogy: you have a roommate who is a very dear friend, and
together you have completely redecorated your room. The colors, the
lighting, the concealed shelves and drapes, all are a glad communion of
your separate tastes. You are both proud and fond of your beautiful
room … and one day you come home and find a new television set. Your
roommate has acquired it and brought it in to surprise you. You are
surprised, and you are happy, too.

But slowly an ugly thing creeps into your mind. The set is a big thing,
an important, dominating thing in the room and in the things for which
you use the room. And it is _his_—not mine or ours, but _his_. There is
his unspoken, undemanded authority in the choice of programs in the
evenings; and where are the chess games, the folk singing with your
guitar, the long hours of phonograph music?

They are there, of course, ready for you every moment; no one has taken
them away. But now the room is different. It can continue to be a happy
room; only a petty mind would resent the new shared riches; but the fact
is that the source of the riches is not shared, was not planned by you
both. This changes the room and everything in it, the colors, the
people, the shape and warmth.

So with my marriage. A thing had come to Grace which made us both richer
but I did not share that source; and damn, damn my selfishness, I could
not bear it; if I could not share it I wanted her deprived of it. I was
gentle; beginning with, “How do you feel, sweetheart? But you aren’t all
right; what were you thinking of? It couldn’t be ‘nothing’ … you were
giving more attention to it than you are to me right now!”

I was firm, beginning with, “Now, look, darling; there’s something here
that we have to face. Please help. Now, exactly why are you so
interested in hearing that Hindemith sketch? You never used to be
interested in music like that. It has no melody, no key, no rhythm; it’s
unpredictable and ugly. I’m quoting you, darling; that’s what you used
to say about it. And now you want to soak yourself in it. Why? Why? What
has changed you? Yes—people must grow and change; I know that.
But—growing so fast, so quickly, in so many different directions! Tell
me, now. Tell me exactly why you feel moved to hear this thing at this
time.”

And—I was angry, beginning with, “Grace! Why didn’t you answer me? Oh,
you heard me, did you? What did I say? Yes; that’s right; you did … then
why didn’t you answer? Well? Not important? You’ll have to realize that
it’s important to me to be answered when I speak to you!”

She tried. I could see her trying. I wouldn’t stop. I began to watch her
every minute. I stopped waiting for openings, and made them myself. I
trapped her. I put on music in which I knew she would be lost, and spoke
softly, and when she did not answer, I would kick over my chair with a
shout and demand that she speak up. She tried.… Sometimes she was
indignant, and demanded the peace that should be her right. Once I
struck her.

That did it. Oh, the poor, brutalized beloved!

Now I can see it, _now!_

She never could answer me, until the one time. What could she have said?
Her “I don’t know!” was the truth. Her patience went too far, her anger
was not far enough, and I know that her hurt was without limits.

I struck her, and she answered my questions. I was even angrier after
she had than I had been before, for I felt that she had known all along,
that until now she had withheld what she knew; and I cursed myself for
not using force earlier and more often. I did. For not hitting _Grace_
before!

I came home that night tired, for there was trouble at the shop; I
suppose I was irascible with the compositors, but that was only because
I had not slept well the night before, which was because—anyway, when I
got home, I slammed the door, which was not usual, and, standing there
with my raincoat draped over one shoulder, looking at the beautiful
spread on the coffee table in front of the fireplace, I demanded,
“What’s that for?”

There were canapés and dainty round and rolled and triangular
sandwiches; a frosty bluish beverage twinkling with effervescence in its
slender pitcher; there were stars and flowers of tiny pickles, pastes
and dressings, a lovely coral potato chip dip, and covered dishes full
of delicate mysteries. There were also two small and vivid bowls of cut
blooms, beautifully arranged.

“Why, for us. Just for us two,” she said.

I said, “Good God. Is there anything the matter with sitting up to a
table and eating like a human being?” Then I went to hang up the coat.

She had not moved when I came back; she was still standing facing the
door, and perhaps a quarter of her welcoming smile was frozen on her
face.

No, I said to myself, no you don’t. Don’t go soft, now. You have her on
the run; let’s break this thing up now, all at once, all over the place.
The healing can come later. I said, “Well?”

She turned to me, her eyes full of tears. “Helmuth …” she said weakly. I
waited. “Why did you … it was only a surprise. A pretty surprise for
you. We haven’t been together for so long … you’ve been …”

“You haven’t been yourself since that accident,” I said coldly. “I think
you like being different. Turn off the tears, honey. They’ll do you no
good.”

“I’m _not_ different!” she wailed; and then she began to cry in earnest.
“I can’t stand it!” she moaned, “I can’t, I can’t … Helmuth, you’re
losing your mind. I’m going to leave you. Leave you … maybe for just a
while, maybe for …”

“You’re going to _what?_” I whispered, going very close to her.

She made a supreme effort and answered, flatly, looking me in the eye,
“I’m going, Helmuth. I’ve got to.”

I think if she’d seen it coming she would have stood back; perhaps I’d
have missed her. I think that if she’d expected it, she would have fled
after I hit her once. Instead she stood still, unutterably shocked,
unmoving, so it was easy to hit her again.

She stood watching me, her face dead, her eyes, and, increasingly, the
flames of the fingermarks on her bleached cheeks burning. In that
instant I knew how she felt, what her mind was trying frantically to do.

She was trying to think of a way to make this a dream, to explain it as
an accident to find some excuse for me; and the growing sting in her
beaten cheeks slowly proved and reproved that it was true. I know this,
because the tingling sting of my hand was proving it to me.

Finally, she put one hand up to her face. She said, _“Why?”_

I said, “Because you have kept a secret from me.”

She closed her eyes, swayed. I did not touch her. Still with her eyes
closed, she said:

“It wants to be left alone. It feeds on vital substance, but there is
always an excess … there is in a healthy person, anyway. It only takes a
small part of that excess, not enough to matter, not enough for anyone
but a jealous maniac like you to notice. It lives happily in a happy
person, it lives richly in a mind rich with the experiences of the
senses, feeding only on what is spare and extra. And you have made me
unfit, forever and ever, with your prodding and scarring, and because
you have found it out it can never be left alone again, it can never be
safe again, it can never be safe while you live, it can never be
content, it can never leave me while I live, it can never, it can never,
it can never.”

Her voice did not trail off—it simply stopped, without a rise or fall in
pitch or volume, without any normal human aural punctuation. What she
said made no sense to me.

I snarled at her—I don’t think it was a word—and turned my back. I heard
her fall, and when I looked she was crumpled up like a castoff, empty,
trodden-on white paper box.

I fought my battle between fury and tenderness that night, and met the
morning with the dull conclusion that Grace was possessed, and that what
had possessed her had gone mad … that I didn’t know where I was, what to
do; that I must save her if I could, but in any case relentlessly track
down and destroy the—the—No, it hadn’t a name …

Grace was conscious, docile, and had nothing to say. She was not angry
or resentful; she was nothing but—obedient. She did what she was told,
and when she finished she stopped until she was told to do something
else.

I called in Doc Knapp. He said that what was mostly wrong with her was
outside the field of a medical doctor, but he didn’t think a little
regimented rest and high-powered food therapy would hurt.

I let him take her to the hospital. I think I was almost glad to see her
go. No I wasn’t. I couldn’t be glad. How could I be glad about anything?
Anyway, Knapp would have her rested and fed and quieted down and
fattened up and supplied with two alcohol rubs a day, until she was fit
to start some sort of psychotherapy. She always liked alcohol rubs. She
killed her—she died just before the second alcohol rub, on the fourth
day … Knapp said, when he took her away, “I can’t understand it,
Helmuth. It’s like shock, but in Grace that doesn’t seem right at all.
She’s too strong, too alive.”

Not any more, she isn’t.

My mind’s wandering. Hold on tight, you … Hold.…

Where am I? I am at home. I am sitting in the chair. I am getting up.
Uh! I have fallen down. Why did I fall down? Because my leg was asleep.
What was it asleep? Because I have been sitting here all day and most of
the night without moving. The doorbell is ringing. Why is the doorbell
ringing? Because someone wants to come in. Who is it? Someone who comes
visiting at two o’ eight in the morning, I know that because I started
the clock again and Tinkle says what time it is. Who visits at two o’
eight in the morning? Drunks and police and death. There is a small
person’s shadow on the frosted door, which I open. “Hello, small person,
Grace is dead.”

It is not a drunk it is not the police it is Death who has a child’s
long lashes and small hands, one to hold up a blank piece of paper for
me to stare at, one to slide the knife between my ribs, feel it scrape
on my breastbone … a drama, Enter Knife Left Center, and I fall back
away from the door, my blood leaping lingering after the withdrawn
blade, Grace, Grace, treasure me in your cupped hands—

VI
As Told By
Lawrence Delehanty

I GOT THE call on the car radio just before half-past two. Headquarters
had a phone tip of some funny business out on Poplar Street in Homeland.
The fellow who phones was a milk truck dispatcher on his way to work. He
says he thought he someone at the door of this house stab the guy who
came to the door, close the door and beat it.

I didn’t see anyone around. There were lights on in the house—in what
seemed to be the living room, and in the hallway just inside the door. I
could see how anyone passing by could get a look at such a thing if it
had happened.

I told Sam to stay in the prowl car and ran up the path to the house.

I knocked on the door, figuring maybe there’d be prints on the bell
push. There was no answer. I tried again, and finally opened the door,
turning the knob by the shaft, which was long enough for me to get hold
of without touching the knob.

It had happened all right. The stiff was just inside the door. The guy
was on his back, arms and legs spread out, with the happiest look on his
face I ever saw. No kidding—that guy looked as if he’d just been given a
million dollars. He had blood all over his front.

I took one look and went back and called Sam. He came up asking
questions and stopped asking when he saw the stiff. “Go phone,” I told
him, “and be careful. Don’t touch nothin’.”

While he was phoning I took a quick squint around. There was a few dirty
dishes in the kitchen sink and on the table, and half a bottle of some
liqueur on an end table in the living room, sitting right on the
polished wood, where it’d sure leave a ring. I’d say this guy had been
in there some time without trying to clean up any.

I inched open the drawer in the big sideboard in the dining room and all
the silver was there. None of the drawers in the two bedrooms were open;
it looked like a grudge killing of some kind; there wasn’t no robbery I
could see.

Just as I came back down the stairs the doorbell rang. Sam came out of
the front room and I waved him back. “There goes our prints on the
bell,” I said. “I’ll get it.” I pussyfooted to the door and pulled it
wide open, real sudden.

“Mr. Stoye?” says a kid standing there. He’s about fourteen, maybe,
small for his age. He’s standing out there, three o’clock in the
morning, mind you, smiling real polite, just like it was afternoon and
he’d come around to sell raffle tickets. I felt a retch starting in my
stomach just then—don’t know why. The sight of the stiff hadn’t bothered
me none. Maybe something I ate. I swallowed it down and said, “Who are
you?”

He said, “I would like to see Mr. Stoye.”

“Bub,” I said, “Mr. Stoye isn’t seeing anybody just now. What do you
want?”

He squinted around me and saw the stiff. I guess I should’ve stopped him
but he had me off guard. And you know, he didn’t gasp or jump back or
any of the things you expect anyone to do. He just straightened up, and
he smiled.

“Well,” he says, sort of petting his jacket pocket, “I don’t s’pose
there’s anything I can do now,” and he smiles at me, real bright. “Well,
good night,” he says, and turns to go.

I nabbed him and spun him inside and shut the door. “What do you know
about all this?” I asked him.

He looked at the stiff, where I nodded, and he looked at me. The stiff
didn’t bother him.

“Why, nothing,” he said. “I don’t know anything at all. Is that really
Mr. Stoye?”

“You know it is.”

“I think I did know, all right,” he said. “Well, can I go home now? Dad
doesn’t know I’m out.”

“I bet he doesn’t. Let’s see what you got in your pockets.”

He didn’t seem to mind. I frisked him. Inside the jacket pocket was a
jump knife—one of those Army issue paratrooper’s clasp knives with a
spring; touch the button and _click!_ You’ve got four and a half inches
of razor steel sticking out of your fist, ready for business. A lot of
’em got out in war surplus. Too many. We’re always finding ’em in
carcasses.

I told him he’d have to stick around. He frowned a little bit and said
he was worried about his father, but I didn’t let that make no
difference. He gave his name without any trouble. His name was Ronnie
Daniels. He was a clean-cut little fellow, just as nice and polite as I
ever saw.

Well, I asked him all kinds of questions. His answers just didn’t make
no sense. He said he couldn’t recall just what it was he wanted to see
Stoye about. He said he had never met Stoye and had never been out here
before. He said he got the address from knowing the phone number; went
right up to the telephone company and wormed it out of one of the girls
there. He said he didn’t remember at all where he got the number from. I
looked at the number just out of curiosity; it was Homeland 2065, which
didn’t mean nothing to me.

After that, there wasn’t anything to do until the homicide squad got
there. I knew the kid’s old man, this Daniels, would have to get dragged
into it, but that wasn’t for me to do; that would be up to the detective
looey. I turned the kid over to Sam.

I remember Sam’s face just then; it turned pale. I asked him what was
the matter but he just swallowed hard and said he didn’t know; maybe it
was the pickles he had with his midnight munch. He took the kid into the
front room and they got into a fine conversation about cops and murders.
He sure seemed to be a nice, healthy, normal kid. Quiet and obedient—you
know. I can’t really blame Sam for what happened.

The squad arrived—two carloads, sirens and all, making so much noise I
thought sure Stoye would get up and tell ’em to let him rest in
peace—and in they came—photogs, print men, and the usual bunch of cocky
plainclothesmen. They swarmed all over.

Flick was the man in charge, stocky, tough, mad at everybody all the
time, especially on the night detail. Man, how he hated killers that
worked at night and dragged him away from his pinochle!

I told the whole story to him and his little book.

“His name’s Tommy,” I said, “and he says he lives at—”

“His name’s Ronnie,” says Sam, from behind me.

“Hey,” I says. “I thought I told you to stay with him.”

“I had to go powder my nose,” says Sam. “My stomach done a flip-flop a
while back that had me worried. It’s okay. Brown was dusting in the room
when I went out. And besides, that’s a nice little kid. He wouldn’t—”

“Brown!” Flick roared.

Brown came out of the living room. “Yeah, chief.”

“You done in the front room?”

“Yeah; everything I could think of. No prints except Stoye’s, except on
the phone. I guess they’d be Sam’s.”

“The kid’s all right?”

“Was when I left,” said Brown, and went back into the living room. Flick
and me and Sam went into the front room.

The kid was gone.

Sam turned pale.

“Ronnie!” he bellows. “Hey you, Ronnie!”

No answer.

“You hadda go powder your big fat nose,” says Flick to Sammy. Sam looked
bad. The soft seats in a radio car feel good to a harness bull, and I
think Sam decided right then that he’d be doing his job on foot for
quite a while.

It was easy to see what had happened. Sammy left the room, and then
Brown got finished and went out, and in those few seconds he was alone
the kid had stepped through the short hall into the kitchen and out the
side door.

Sam looked even worse when I suddenly noticed that the ten-inch ham
slicer was gone from the knife rack; that was one of the first things I
looked at after I saw Stoye had been stabbed. You always look for the
kitchen knives in a home stabbing.

Flick returned to Sam and opened his mouth, and in that moment, believe
me, I was glad I was me and not him. I thought fast.

“Flick,” I said, “I know where that kid’s going. He was all worried
about what his old man would think. Here—I got his address in my book.”

Flick snapped, “Okay. Get down there right away. I’ll call
what’s-his-name—Daniels—from here and tell him to wait for the kid and
hold him if he shows up before you do. Get down there, now, and hurry.
Keep your eyes peeled on the way; you might see him on the street. Look
out for that knife. Kelly, get a general alarm out for that kid soon’s
I’m off the phone. Or send it from your car.”

He turned back to me, thumbed at Sam. “Take him with you,” he says, “I
want him out of my sight. And if hot damned nose gets shiny again see he
don’t use your summons book.”

We ran out and piled into the car and took off. We didn’t go straight to
Daniels’ address. Sam hoped we would see the kid on the way; I think he
had some idea of a heroic hand-to-hand grapple with the kid in which
maybe he’d get a little bit stabbed in the line of duty, which might
quiet Flick down some.

So we cut back and forth between Myrtle Avenue and Varick; the kid
could’ve taken a trolley on one or a bus on the other. We found out soon
enough that he’d done neither; he’d found a cab; and I’d like to know
who it was drove that hack.

He must’ve been a jet pilot.

It was real dark on Daniels’ street. The nearest streetlight was a
couple hundred feet away, and there was a big maple tree in Daniels’
front yard that cast thick black shadows all over the front of the
house. I missed the number in the dark and pulled over to the curb; I
knew it must be somewhere around here.

Me and Sam got out and Sam went up on the nearest porch to see the house
number; Daniels was two doors away. That’s how we happened to be far to
the left of the house when the killer rang Daniels’ bell.

We both saw it, Sam and me, that small dark shadow up against Daniels’
front door. The door had a glass panel and there was some sort of night
light on inside, so all we saw was the dark blob waiting there, ringing
on the bell. I guess Daniels was awake, after Flick’s phone call.

I grabbed Sam’s arm, and he shook me free. He had his gun out. I said,
“What are you gonna do?” He was all hopped up, I guess.

He wanted to make an arrest or something. He wanted to be The Man here.
He didn’t want to go back on a beat. He said, “You know how Stoye was
killed. Just like that.”

That made sense, but I said, “Sam! You’re not going to shoot a kid!”

“Just wing him, if it looks—”

Just then the door opened. There wasn’t much light. I saw Daniels, a
stocky, balding man with a very mild face, peering out. I saw an arm
come up from that small shadowy blob. Then Sam fired twice. There was a
shrill scream, and the clatter of a knife on the porch. I heard Ronnie
yell, “Dad! Dad!”

Then Sam and I were pounding over to the house. Daniels was frozen
there, staring down onto the porch and the porch steps.

At the foot of the steps the kid was huddled. He was unconscious. The
ham slicer gleamed wickedly on the steps near his hand.

I called out, “Mr. Daniels! We’re the police. Better get back inside.”

And together Sam and I lifted up the kid. He didn’t weigh much. Going
inside, Sam tripped over his big flat feet and I swore at him.

We put the kid down on the couch. I didn’t see any blood. Daniels was
dithering around like an old lady. I pushed him into a chair and told
him to stay there and try to take it easy.

Sam went to phone Flick. I started going over the kid.

There was no blood.

There were no holes in him, either; not a nick, not a graze. I stood
back and scratched my head.

Daniels said, “What’s wrong with him. What happened?”

Inside, I heard Sam at the phone. “Yeah, we got ’im. It was the kid all
right. Tried to stab his old man. I winged him. Huh? I don’t know. We’re
looking him over now. Yeah.”

“Take it easy,” I said again to Daniels. He looked rough. “Stay right
there.”

I went to the door, which was standing open. Over by the porch rail I
saw something shining green and steel blue. I started over to it,
tripped on something yielding, and went flat on my face. Sam came
running out. “What’s the—_uh!!_” and he came sailing out and landed on
top of me. He’s a big boy.

I said, “My goodness, Sam, that was careless of you,” or words to that
effect, and some other things amounting to maybe Flick had the right
idea about him.

“Damn it, Delehanty,” he says, “I tripped on something. What are you
doing sprawled out here, anyway?”

“I was looking for—” and I picked it up, the green and steel blue thing.
It was a Finnish sheath knife, long and pointed, double razor edges,
scrollwork up near the hilt. Blood, still a bit tacky, in the
scrollwork.

“Where’d that come from?” grunted Sam, and took it. “Hey! Flick just
told me the medic says Stoye was stabbed with a two-edged knife. You
don’t suppose—”

“I don’t suppose nothin’,” I said, getting up. “On your feet, Sam. Flick
finds us like this, he’ll think we were playing mumblety-peg … tell you
what, Sam; I took a jump knife off the kid out there, and it only had a
single edge.”

I went down the steps and picked it up. Sam pointed out that the kid
never had a chance to use the ham slicer.

I shrugged that off. Flick was paid the most for thinking—let him do
most of the thinking. I went to the side of the door and looked at the
bell push to get an idea as to how it might take prints, and then went
inside. Sam came straight in and tripped again.

“Pick up ya feet!”

Sam had fallen to his knees this time. He growled something and,
swinging around, went to feeling around the porch floor with his hands.
“Now it’s patty-cake,” I said. “For Pete’s sake, Sam—”

Inside Daniels was on the floor by the couch, rubbing the kid’s hands,
saying, real scared like, “Ronnie! Ronnie!”

_“Delehanty!”_

Half across the room, I turned. Sam was still on his knees just outside
the door, and his face was something to see. “Delehanty, just come here,
will you?”

There was something in his voice that left no room for a wisecrack. I
went right to him. He motioned me down beside him, took my wrist and
pushed my hand downward.

It touched something, but—_there was nothing there_.

We looked at each other, and I wish I could write down what that look
said.

I touched again, felt it. It was like cloth, then like flesh, yielding,
then bony.

“It’s the Invisible Man!” breathed Sam, bug-eyed.

“Stop talking nonsense,” I said thickly. “And beside, it’s a woman. Look
here.”

“I’ll take your word for it,” said Sam, backing away. “Anyhow, I’m a
married man.”

Cars came, screaming as usual. “Here’s Flick.”

Flick and his mob came streaming up the steps.

“What’s going on here? Where’s the killer?”

Sam stood in front of the doorway, holding his hands out like he was
unsnarling traffic. He was shaking. “Walk over this side,” he said, “or
you’ll step on her.”

“What are you gibbering about? Step on who?”

Sam flapped his hands and pointed at the floor. Flick and Brown and all
the others looked down, then up again. I don’t know what got into me. I
just couldn’t help it. I said, “He found a lady-bug and he don’t want
you to step on it.”

Flick got so mad, so quick, he didn’t even swear.

We went inside. The medic was working over the boy, who was still
unconscious. Flick was demanding, “Well! Well? What’s the matter with
him?”

“Not a thing I can find out, not without a fluoroscope and some blood
tests. Shock, maybe?”

“Shot?” gasped Daniels.

“Definitely not,” said the M.O.

Flick said, very, very quietly, “Sam told me over the phone that he had
shot the boy. What about this, Delehanty? Can you talk sense, or is Sam
contagious?”

I told him what we had seen from the side of the house. I told him that
we couldn’t be sure who it was that rang the bell, but that we saw
whoever it was raise a knife to strike, and then Sam fired, and then we
ran up and found the kid lying at the bottom of the steps. We heard a
knife fall.

“Did you hear him fall down the steps?”

“No,” said Sam.

“Shut up, you,” said Flick, not looking at him. “Well, Delehanty?”

“I don’t think so,” I said, thinking hard. “It all happened so fast.”

“It was a girl.”

“What was a girl? Who said that?”

Daniels shuffled forward. “I answered the door. A girl was there. She
had a knife. A long one, pointed. I think it was double-edged.”

“Here it is,” said Sam brightly.

Flick raised his eyes to heaven, moved his lips silently, and took the
knife.

“That’s it,” said Daniels. “Then there was a gunshot, and she screamed
and fell.”

“She did, huh? Where is she?”

“I—I don’t know,” said Daniels in puzzlement.

“She’s still there,” said Sam smugly. I thought, oh-oh. This is it.

“Thank you, Sam,” said Flick icily. “Would you be good enough to point
her out to me?”

Sam nodded. “There. Right there,” and he pointed.

“See her, lying there in the doorway,” I piped up.

Flick looked at Sam, and he looked at me. “Are you guys trying to_—uk!_”
His eyes bulged, and his jaw went slack.

Everyone in the room froze. There, in plain sight on the porch, lay the
body of a girl. She was quite a pretty girl, small and dark. She had a
bullet hole on each side of her neck, a little one here and a great big
one over here.

VII
Told by the Author
Theodore Sturgeon

I DON’T MUCH care for the way this story’s going.

You want to write a story, see, and you sit down in front of the mill,
wait until that certain feeling comes to you, hold off a second longer
just to be quite sure that you know exactly what you want to do, take a
deep breath, and get up and make a pot of coffee.

This sort of thing is likely to go on for days, until you are out of
coffee and can’t get more until you can pay for same, which you can do
by writing a story and selling it; or until you get tired of messing
around and sit down and write a yarn purely by means of knowing how to
do it and applying the knowledge.

But this story’s different. It’s coming out as if it were being dictated
to me, and I’m not used to that. It’s a haywire sort of yarn; I have no
excuses for it, and can think of no reasons for such a plot having
unfolded itself to me. It isn’t that I can’t finish it up; far from
it—all the plot factors tie themselves neatly together at the end, and
this with no effort on my part at all.

This can be demonstrated; it’s the last chapter that bothers me. You
see, I didn’t write it. Either someone’s playing a practical joke on me,
or—No. I prefer to believe someone’s playing a practical joke on me.

Otherwise, this thing is just too horrible.

But about that demonstration, here’s what happened:

Flick never quite recovered from the shock of seeing that sudden corpse.
The careful services of the doctor were not required to show that the
young lady was dead, and Flick recovered himself enough to start asking
questions.

It was Daniels who belatedly identified her as the nurse he had seen at
the hospital the day Mrs. Stoye killed herself. The nurse’s name was
Lucille Holder. She had come from England as a girl; she had a flawless
record abroad and in this country. The head doctor told the police on
later investigation that he had always been amazed at the tremendous
amount of work Miss Holder could turn out, and had felt that inevitably
some sort of a breakdown must come. She went all to pieces on Mrs.
Stoye’s death, and he sent her on an immediate vacation.

Her movements were not difficult to trace, after she left the
administrative office, where she ascertained Mr. Daniels’ address. She
went first to his house, and the only conclusion the police could come
to was that she had done so on purpose to kill him. But he was not
there; he, it seems, had been trying to find her at the hospital at the
time! So she left. The following night she went out to Stoye’s, rang the
bell, and killed him.

Ronnie followed her, apparently filled with the same unaccountable
impulse, and was late. Miss Holder went then to Daniels’ house and tried
to kill him, but was shot by the policeman, just as Ronnie, again late,
arrived.

Ronnie lay in a coma for eight weeks. The diagnosis was brain fever,
which served as well as anything else. He remembered little, and that
confused. He did, however, vouch for the nurse’s visit to his home the
night of Mrs. Stoye’s death. He could not explain why he had kept it a
secret from his father, nor why he had had the impulse to kill Mr. Stoye
(he admitted this impulse freely and without any horror), nor how he had
happened to think of finding Stoye’s address through the information
operator at the telephone company.

He simply said that he wanted to get it without asking any traceable
questions. He also admitted that when he found that Mr. Stoye had
already been killed, he felt that he must secure another weapon and go
and kill his father. He says he remembers thinking of it without any
emotion whatsoever at the time, though he was appalled at the thought
after he came out of the coma.

“It’s all like a story I read a long time ago,” he said. “I don’t
remember doing these things at all; I remember seeing them done.”

When the policeman shot Miss Holder, Ronnie felt nothing; the lights
went out, and he knew nothing until eight weeks later.

These things remained unexplained to the participants:

Mrs. Stoye’s disappearing body. The witnesses were the two Daniels and
Miss Holder. Miss Holder could not report it; Ronnie did not remember
it; Mr. Daniels kept his own counsel.

Lucille Holder’s disappearing body. Daniels said nothing about this
either, and for the rest of his life tried to forget it. The members of
the homicide detail and the two prowl car men tried to forget it, too.
It was not entered into the records of the case. It seemed to have no
bearing, and all concerned were happy to erase it as much as possible.
If they spoke of it at all, it was in terms of mass hypnosis—which was
reasonably accurate at that.…

Lucille Holder’s motive in killing Mr. Stoye and in trying to kill Mr.
Daniels. This could only be guessed at; it was simple to put it down to
the result of a nervous breakdown after overwork.

Mrs. Stoye’s suicide. This, too, was attributed to a mounting mental
depression and was forgotten as quickly as possible.

And two other items must be mentioned. The radio patrolman Sam was
called on the carpet by Detective Lieutenant Flick for inefficiency in
letting the boy Ronnie go. He was not punished, oddly enough. He barely
mentioned the corpse of Lucille Holder, and that there were witnesses to
the fact that _apparently_ the lieutenant had not seen it, though he had
stepped right over it on the way into Daniels’ house. Flick swore that
he was being framed, but let Sam alone thereafter.

The other item has to do with Miss Jennie Beaufort, an operator in the
Information Office of the telephone company. Miss Beaufort won a prize
on a radio quiz—a car, a plane, two stoves, a fur coat, a diamond ring,
a set of SwingFree shoulder pads, and a 38-day South American cruise.
She quit her job the following day, took the cruise, enjoyed it
mightily, learned on her return that income tax was due on the valuation
of all her prizes, sold enough to pay the tax, and was so frightened at
the money it took that she went back to work at her old job.

[]

So, you see, these tangled deaths, these mad actions, were all
explained, forgotten, rationalized—made to fit familiar patterns, as
were Charles Fort’s strange lights and shapes in the night, as were the
Flying Discs, the disappearance of Lord Bathhurst, the teleportation of
Kaspar Hauser, and the disappearance of the crew of the _Marie Celeste_.

I leave it to the reader to explain the following chapter. I found it by
and in my typewriter yesterday afternoon (I’d been writing this story
all the previous night). Physically, it was the most extraordinary
looking manuscript I have ever seen.

In the first place the paper bails had apparently been released most of
the time, and letters ran into each other with wild abandon. In the
second place there were very few capital letters; I was reminding of Don
Marquis’s heroic Archy the cockroach, who used to write long effusions
while Mr. Marquis was asleep, by jumping from one key to the other.

But Archy was not heavy enough to operate the shift key, and so he
eschewed the upper case characters. In the third place, the spelling was
indescribable. It was a mixture of phonetics and something like
Speed-writing, or ABC shorthand. It begins this way:

i mm a thngg wch livz n fantsy whr tru fantsy z fond in th mynz v mn.

I couldn’t possibly inflict it all on you in its original form. It took
me the better part of two hours just to get the pages in order—they
weren’t numbered, of course.

After I plowed through it myself, I undertook a free translation. I have
rewritten it twice since, finding more rhythm, more fluidity, each time,
as I become familiar with the extraordinary idiom in which it was
written. I think that as it now stands it closely follows the intent and
mood of the original. The punctuation is entirely mine; I regard
punctuation as inflection in print, and have treated this accordingly,
as if it were read aloud.

I must say this: there are three other people who could conceivably have
had access to this machine while I was asleep. They are Jeff and Les and
Mary.

I know for a fact that Jeff, who is an artist, was busy the entire time
with a nonobjective painting of unusual vividness and detail; I know how
he works, and I know what the picture looked like when I quit writing
for the night, and what it looked like when I woke up, and believe me,
he must have been painting like mad the entire time—he and no one else.

As for Les, he works in the advertising department of a book publisher,
and obviously has not the literary command indicated by this manuscript.

And Mary—I am lucky enough to say that Mary is very fond of me, and
would be the last person in the world to present me with such a nasty
jolt as is innate in this final chapter. Here it is; and please forgive
me for this lengthy but necessary introduction to it, and for my
intrusion; this sort of thing is strictly against the rules.

VIII
“?”

I AM A Thing which lives in fantasy, where true fantasy lives in the
minds of men.

What fumbling is this, what clumsiness, what pain.… I who never was a
weight, who never turned, coerced, nor pressed a person, never ordered,
never forced—I who live with laughter, die with weeping, rise and hope
and cheer with man’s achievements, yet with failure and despair go numb
and cold and silent and unnoticeable—what have I to do with agony?

Know me, mankind, know me now and let me be.

Know the worst. I feed on you. I eat and breathe no substance but a
precious ether. No, not souls (but where a soul is strong and clean I
live my best). I take this guarded essence where I can, and thrive on
it; and when I choose a host I am imprisoned, for I may not leave him
while he lives, and when he dies I must locate another to inhabit. And I
have … powers.

But know this too: The thing that I take is the essence of joy—and in
joy is created an excess of that which I need. I drink in your
reservoir, yes; but when there is drought and the level is low, and your
needs are increased, and the water turns bitter with flavors of worry,
and anger, and fear, then I shrink and I soften, and lose all my hunger;
and then if you grieve, if your spirit is broken, if you should forget
all the pleasure and glory and wonder of being a man—then I die.…

Such a death is not death as you know it. It is more a waiting unmoving
within a soul’s winter, to wake with the spring of the heart. But where
people grieve over years, or let fear share their souls with me, then I
must wait for the walls of my prison to crumble.

Then, after the death of my host I go drifting, seeking another. That is
my Search, and in it, for me, is the ultimate cold. No human can know
such a thing, for death, for a human, is kinder.

I am and I am not a parasite. I feed on your substance; yet what living
thing in the world does not feed on the substance of others? And I take
only excess—take only that which you radiate gaily when you feel joy.

When you feel otherwise, then I must wait, or must sleep, or must die.
Where is the evil in being a parasite, when I take only a product which
you never need? I demand only sustenance; that is the right of all
living things. I ask in addition a thing which is simple enough—I ask to
be left to myself, to encyst or to flower or be joyful, without any
devilish probing.

I do not know how old I am; I do not know if there are others like me. I
do not know how many hosts I have inhabited, or whether I was born or
hatched, or whether, like a human, I must one day truly die. I shall, no
doubt; I am alive, and nothing lives forever. I know my years are
thousands, and my hosts have been in the scores of hundreds. I have no
interest in statistics.

Yet you must know me.… I think my origins were like a plant’s—an
accidental seed of sensuality perhaps. My infancy was passed in dreams,
in sightless stirrings when the stimulation merited, and blacknesses
between. I think that when my hosts passed on, my knotted insubstantial
cyst just drifted like a petal on a roiling stream, it bumped and
nuzzled and at last slipped in when chance presented hosts which
qualified.

To qualify, in those uncaring phases, men had but to show an openness
and nothing more. And when I gained experience and consciousness
increased, and realization came to me, and I was grown and had ability
to choose, I gained as well the power of rejection.

And after that I was no longer bound to sickly children, open to me
through their thirst for colors, senses, odors, vivid to them through
unsaid convictions that the end was near. I became increasingly
meticulous in choosing; I became an expert in detecting signs of
whimsy-richness in its earliest potential. I have powers.…

You have powers too, you human ones. You can change the color of a life
by vicious striking at a stranger-child. You can give away a thing you
treasure, making memories which later might compose a symphony. You can
do a thousand thousand things you never do; you never try; there is no
reason to depart from paths you have established. When, however,
circumstances force you into it, you do the “superhuman.”

Once my host was Annabelle, a woman on a farm. (She loved the birds!) In
a blizzard she was lost; she was old and had a crippled knee, and could
not find the road, and could not last the night. She stumbled on a post
which stood erect and lonesome on the prairie, and, without a conscious
thought of bravery, or what mankind might say to her, she put her hand
upon the weathered wood, and in the blowing snow and bitter cold, she
walked around the post—around and around, in spite of age and pain and
growing numbness, walked around the post until the sun came up in
blowing gray, then growing cold.

They found her and they saved her, when in truth she saved herself.
There was about her such a cloud of pure achievement, such a joy at
having cheated wind and cold! (I fed that day; I still possess the
energies she radiated!) … I have powers; all have powers, when we’re
forced to use them. I have powers, you have too, which you have never
catalogued.

I have powers—now I use them!

I have no host. Such bitterness and agony as I have just experienced I
never want again. My Search, this time, will be a thorough one and for
it, now, I make my sacrifice. I am unknown; but with this script, these
purposely hypnotic words, _I shall be known!_ I sacrifice my privacy, my
yearning for the pleasant weightless dark where I have dwelt. I
challenge mankind’s probing, for, through these bright words and
burnished continuities, I shall locate a host who will defend me!

I had a man—he had me, possibly—who would have fought for me. And after
him I dwelt within a woman’s mind—the richest and most magical of all.
The man was one of those who, on maturing, never lost the colorful
ability to wonder like a child. And one day, miming, imitating a precise
and dainty minuet in joyful incongruity (he danced alone upon the
bouncing platform of a truck) a falling girder struck him and he died. I
had no warning and no way to make a Search; I flung myself into the mind
of one who was nearby in close communion with my dead host’s whimsy.

Grace had a mind that was magic throughout. Never in thousands of years
have I seen such a shimmering jewel; never in thousands of pages of
words found in thousands of languages could such a trove be described.
All that she saw was transmuted in sibilant subtleties; all that she
heard was in breath-taking colors and shapes. What she touched, what she
said, what she saw, what she felt, what she thought—these were all
blended in joy.

She was the pinnacle; she was the source of the heady exuberant food
which in flavor eclipsed my most radiant memories. She, like the
blizzard of Annabelle—she was the suitable circumstance, bringing about
the release of the powers I held all untried.

I stirred in her mind. I found I could reach out and touch certain
sources of hunger—sights that she never had seen and sensations she
never had turned to, things which should surely delight a sensitive
soul.

I found to my joy that with care I controlled them, the hungers for
things I remembered in hosts less responsive. I practiced this skill as
she broadened her life, and I led her to music and poems and thoughts
which she never, perhaps, could have found by herself. She had every
reason for happiness with all these riches, and I—oh, I gloried in
bringing things to her, as many a gifted composer has brought new music
to some virtuoso.

But her husband was Stoye.

Stoye was a devil. He hated me for what I was, before he could define
it. His mind was quite as rich as hers, but something curbed it. Growing
with her was impossible; he sensed with rare perception that a Thing had
come to her, and since that Thing was not of him, he hated it. It
mattered not to him that she was better for it. Brutally he turned away
from sharing what I brought into his home.

And she—I could not take her from him. How I tried! Poor treasure trove,
she was at last a battleground between that questing creature and
myself. He hounded me through her, and I struck back by taking her to
rare enchantments in which he could not share.

He was the very first—the very first—of all the humans I have known, to
recognize me and to seek me out. This recognition was intolerable; all
my life I have avoided it, and lived in war and secret joyfulness. He
goaded me until I evidenced myself; I never realized I could make a
human speak, but Grace spoke for me when she said that “It only wants to
be let alone.”

She might as well have died, right then and there, for all the
sustenance I got from her thereafter. I knew that she would kill
herself; between us, her and me, there was a madness caught from Stoye.

Stoye put her, numb and docile, into the hospital. I started to encyst,
for Grace’s well was dry to me. I found a likely subject in the nurse,
who seemed as sensitive as Grace (but lacked that fine capacity for
whimsy) and I poised myself to make the change. While waiting, then, I
thought of Stoye—and realized that, with Grace’s death, he would not
rest until he found me and destroyed me, either by attacking all my
hosts, or if he learned the way of it, by closing minds against me by
his printed propaganda. He had to be destroyed.

Grace killed herself; her one blind foolishness, her love for Stoye and
all her stupid thoughts that she had lost it, made her do it. I might
have stopped her; but why should I, when I needed a release from all her
bitterness? Believe me, it was just as strong as all her joys had
been … before she leaped she tried to warn him, tried to send some crazy
message to him through a youngster standing down below.

My connection with her was not close just then; I am not sure; she still
was set on death as an escape but wished her husband to be watchful and
protect himself. And then she leaped.

And then it came—that awful amputation.

I could not know that Ronnie was so strong a host, potentially—that so
well suited to me was he that, as I flashed upward to the nurse, to take
possession, I was torn apart!

I have no substance; yet I am an entity, with limits and with
boundaries. These were ruptured; while my greater part found room within
the nurse’s mind, a fragment nestled into Ronnie’s.

At first I felt a transcendental pain and dizziness; and then I did the
things I could to be protected. I hid the crumpled body with a forced
hypnotic wave (this is no subtle mystery; a thousand men can do it) to
keep the wave of terror all confused with curiosity, for terror
undiluted quite inhibits my possession of a host.

I settled into Lucille Holder’s mind and tested the controls which Stoye
had forced me to develop. Lucille was far less strong than Grace had
been, and forcing her was easy. I was wounded, I was maddened, and at
last I drank, with purpose and a new dark joy, the thing called hate.

Stoye had to die. The man called Daniels, Ronnie’s father, saw Grace
leap and was a witness. Possibly he might become too curious, with his
son possessed, and be another probing devil. He must die. Ronnie had a
part of me, and I did not think he could release it while he lived. So
he must die.

To test my new controls, I sent the nurse at first to do the minor task.
The elder Daniels was not there; and when I found myself confronted with
that other part of me, I nearly died of yearning. And I realized, in
that closeness, that the boy could be controlled as well, and that he
could destroy his father quite at my convenience, while Lucille could
kill him later. Satisfied, I went away.

I spent that night and all next day securing my controls, and
practicing. And late the night that followed, I killed Stoye, and two
strange things happened.

One was when Stoye died; I felt a wave of powerful protectiveness about
him as he fled his body, and I sensed again the fullest, richest magic
that was Grace. I was terrified of it; I had never known before that
humans could outlive their carcasses.…

The other thing was the arrival of Ronnie, apparently moved by the part
of me carried within him. Yet since he possessed but a fragment, his
effort was late and his motive was weak, and I feared that he might make
a botch of the killing of Daniels. I therefore sent Lucille to do it;
Ronnie, again weak and tardy, followed my orders.

The gunshot, the bullet which shattered the neck of the nurse, was quite
unexpected. I was flung unprepared into cold, in my nakedness, cold
indescribable, cold beyond bearing. Yet I was glad; for the fraction of
me that was Ronnie’s came streaming toward me as I was exploded away
from the nurse. The wrench it gave Ronnie must have been dreadful; when
I settle into a host my roots go down deep.

I hid Lucille’s body and searched all the minds in the house for a
suitable host. Ronnie was perfect, unconscious and closed. Daniels was
fretful; I can’t abide fear. I fought back the cold, drew inward,
contracted, and formed, at long last, a new cyst. I let Lucille’s body
be seen, and ignoring the others—their whimsy was as flat as their
oversized feet—I withdrew.

And I have been thinking.

Some things were important that now cannot matter. I am different
because of the searchings of Stoye—I blame him for all that has
happened, and that is a thing which can no longer matter.

I know how to hate now, and how to make murder; the taste of these
things is still bitter, but so is the taste of good stout when first
taken, and stout has a taste worth acquiring. Like Grace I still have
all my earlier qualities—the sun on a mountain or watching the curve of
the wing of a gull (through a host) certainly has all the zest for me
that it has ever had. Now I have more, though; and that is a thing which
can matter very much indeed.

I have been selfish. It never occurred to me, back in the days of the
man who did minuets joyfully, that I might do something _for_ him whom I
chose as a host. Grace taught me that, purely by feeding me richly
through her experiences, purely by being a subject for my schooled
suggestions. There may have been many who carried me who were
susceptible to my control.

I could not know without trying, and I never tried this command until
Grace took me in. And since then I hunger, I thirst for the richness and
beauty and shifting and changing of colors and sounds which she brought
me, and never again will rest and be fed and be happy to have just
enough to sustain me.

I drift, now, encysted, but testing my powers when never before had I
thought of them. I find I am mobile; also, to certain degrees, I can
move things—this writing machine, for example, though it is slow and
laborious. I find I can whisper to humans and fit some strange thoughts
and ideas to each other.

I’ll find, soon, a person, a man or a woman, or even a sensitive child.
This one will be mine and I’ll lead him to wonders of sense and of music
and heady adventure. I think I am learning to savor the tartness of
terror, the bloody salt flavor of killing with purpose. My host will
exist in a series of colorful pageants and move in a world of emotional
riches, all of my carefulest choosing.

And for this I sacrifice that which I guarded—my passion for quiet and
secret enjoyments. I say to you, Know me! Suspect me! For by your
suspicion you open yourself to my coming. And when some great mural is
painted by someone who never did passable work in his life before that,
suspect me. And when in a prison some cringing psychotic says, over and
over, “A voice said to do it!” suspect me.

Whenever you walk in the street and feel a strange spasm of nausea,
suspect me indeed; for then I am injured, and what you have seen is a
part-host like Ronnie; and know that that person must die—and can kill
if I will it.

I am so cold.…

I write this because in my search for a host who is perfect, I find that
one segment of humans is almost entirely open. These are the readers and
tellers of tales of the dark and of terror and madness. The one who has
written these chapters would serve as a host—but I fear he would turn on
me, feed on my memories, use me for piddling profit in plying his trade.

Besides, he’s a bit superficial for one of my tastes. I know his
intentions, however, and what he will do with this script. I know he is
frightened because of the way this long tale has unfolded. I know, too,
that nothing will keep him from seeing it printed.

When it is read, though, by thousands of like-minded people over the
world, and he hears of the music and murder created by someone who fell
to me only through reading it, then he will curse and will wish he were
dead, and wish he had torn this to pieces.



THE MARTIAN AND THE MORON


IN 1924, WHEN I was just a pup, my father was a thing currently known as
a “radio bug.” These creatures were wonderful. They were one part
fanatic, one part genius, a dash of childlike wonderment, and two
buckets full of trial-and-error. Those were the days when you could get
your picture in the paper for building a crystal set in something
smaller and more foolish than the character who had his picture in the
paper the day before. My father had his picture in there for building a
“set” on a pencil eraser with a hunk of galena in the top and about four
thousand turns of No. 35 enameled wire wrapped around it. When they came
around to take his picture, he dragged out another one built into a
peanut. Yes, a real peanut which brought in WGBS, New York. (You see, I
really do remember.) They wanted to photograph that too, but Dad thought
it would be a little immodest for him to be in the paper twice. So they
took Mother’s picture with it. The following week they ran both
pictures, and Dad got two letters from other radio bugs saying his
eraser radio wouldn’t work and Mother got two hundred and twenty
letters, forwarded from the paper, twenty-six of which contained
proposals of marriage. (Of course Mother was a YL and not an OW then.)

Oddly enough, Dad never did become a radio ham. He seemed satisfied to
be the first in the neighborhood to own a set, then to build a
set—(after the spiderweb coil phase he built and operated a one-tube
regenerative set which featured a UX-11 detector and a thing called a
vario-coupler which looked like a greasy fist within a lacquered hand,
and reached his triumph when he hooked it into a forty-’leven-pound
“B-eliminator” and ran it right out of the socket like a
four-hundred-dollar “electric” radio) and first in the state to be on
the receiving end of a court order restraining him from using his
equipment (every time he touched the tuning dials—three—the neighboring
radios with which Joneses were keeping up with each other, began howling
unmercifully). So for a time he left his clutter of forms and wire and
solder-splattered “bathtub” condensers shoved to the back of his cellar
workbench, and went back to stuffing field mice and bats, which had been
his original hobby. I think Mother was glad, though she hated the smells
he made down there. That was after the night she went to bed early with
the cramps, and he DX’d WLS in Chicago at 4:30 one morning with a
crystal set and wanted to dance. (He learned later that he had crossed
aerials with Mr. Bohackus next door, and had swiped Mr. Bohackus’
fourteen-tube Atwater-Kent signal right out of Mr. Bohackus’
gooseneck-megaphone speaker. Mr. Bohackus was just as unhappy as Mother
to hear about this on the following morning. They had both been up all
night.)

Dad never was one to have his leg pulled. He got very sensitive about
the whole thing, and learned his lesson so well that when the last great
radio fever took him, he went to another extreme. Instead of talking his
progress all over the house and lot, he walled himself up. During the
late war I ran up against security regulations—and who didn’t—but they
never bothered me. I had my training early.

He got that glint in his eyes after grunting loudly over the evening
paper one night. I remember Mother’s asking him about it twice, and I
remember her sigh—her famous “here we go again” sigh—when he didn’t
answer. He leapt up, folded the paper, got out his keys, opened the
safe, put the paper in it, locked the safe, put his keys away, looked
knowingly at us, strode out of the room, went down into the cellar, came
up from the cellar, took out his keys, opened the safe, took out the
paper, closed the safe, looked knowingly at us again, said, “Henry, your
father’s going to be famous,” and went down into the cellar.

Mother said, “I knew it. I _knew_ it! I should have thrown the paper
away. Or torn out that page.”

“What’s he going to make, Mother?” I asked.

“Heavens knows,” she sighed. “Some men are going to try to get Mars on
the radio.”

“Mars? You mean the star?”

“It isn’t a star, dear, it’s a planet. They’ve arranged to turn off all
the big radio stations all over the world for five minutes every hour so
the men can listen to Mars. I suppose your father thinks he can listen
too.”

“Gee,” I said, “I’m going down and—”

“You’re going to do no such thing,” said Mother firmly. “Get yourself
all covered with that nasty grease he uses in his soldering, and stay up
until all hours! It’s almost bedtime. And—Henry—”

“Yes, Mother?”

She put her hands on my shoulders. “Listen to me, darling. People have
been—ah—teasing your father.” She meant Mr. Bohackus. “Don’t ask him any
questions about this if he doesn’t want to talk, will you, darling?
Promise?”

“All right, Mother.” She was a wise woman.

Dad bought a big shiny brass padlock for his workshop in the cellar, and
every time Mother mentioned the cellar, or the stars, or radio to him in
any connection, he would just smile knowingly at her. It drove her wild.
She didn’t like the key, either. It was a big brass key, and he wore it
on a length of rawhide shoelace tied around his neck. He wore it day and
night. Mother said it was lumpy. She also said it was dangerous, which
he denied, even after the time down at Roton Point when we were running
Mr. Bohackus’ new gasoline-driven ice cream freezer out on the beach.
Dad leaned over to watch it working. He said, “This is the way to get
things done, all right. I can’t wait to get into that ice cream,” and
next thing we knew he was face down in the brine and flopping like a
banked trout. We got him out before he drowned or froze. He was bleeding
freely about the nose and lips, and Mr. Bohackus was displeased because
Dad’s key had, in passing through the spur-gears in which it had caught,
broken off nine teeth. That was six more than Dad lost, but it cost much
more to fix Dad’s and showed, Mother said, just how narrow-minded Mr.
Bohackus was.

Anyway, Dad never would tell us what he was doing down in the cellar. He
would arrive home from work with mysterious packages and go below and
lock them up before dinner. He would eat abstractedly and disappear for
the whole evening. Mother, bless her, bore it with fortitude. As a
matter of fact, I think she encouraged it. It was better than the
previous fevers, when she had to sit for hours listening to crackling
noises and organ music through big, heavy, magnetic earphones—or else.
At least she was left to her own devices while all this was going on. As
for me, I knew when I wasn’t needed, and, as I remember, managed to fill
my life quite successfully with clock movements, school, and baseball,
and ceased to wonder very much.

About the middle of August Dad began to look frantic. Twice he worked
right through the night, and though he went to the office on the days
that followed, I doubt that he did much. On August 21—I remember the
date because it was the day before my birthday, and I remember that it
was a Thursday because Dad took the next day off for a “long weekend,”
so it must have been Friday—the crisis came. My bedtime was nine
o’clock. At nine-twenty Dad came storming up from the cellar and
demanded that I get my clothes on instantly and go out and get him two
hundred feet of No. 27 silk-covered wire. Mother laid down the law and
was instantly overridden. “The coil! The one coil I haven’t finished!”
he shouted hysterically. “Six thousand meters, and I have to run out of
it. _Get_ your clothes on this instant, Henry, number twenty-seven wire.
Just control yourself this once Mother and you can have Henry stop
standing there with your silly eyes bulging and get dressed you can have
any hat on Fifth Avenue _hurry!_”

I hurried. Dad gave me some money and a list of places to go, told me
not to come back until I’d tried every one of them, and left the house
with me. I went east, he went west. Mother stood on the porch and wrung
her hands.

I got home about twenty after ten, weary and excited, bearing a large
metal spool of wire. I put it down triumphantly while Mother caught me
up and felt me all over as if she had picked me up at the foot of a
cliff. She looked drawn. Dad wasn’t home yet.

After she quieted down a little she took me into the kitchen and fed me
some chocolate-covered doughnuts. I forget what we talked about, if we
talked, and at the bottom of the steps I could see a ray of yellow
light. “Mother,” I said, “you know what? Dad ran out and left his
workshop open.”

She went to the door and looked down the stairs.

“Darling!” she said after a bit, “Uh—wouldn’t you like to—I mean, if
he—”

I caught on quick. “I’ll look. Will you stay up here and bump on the
floor if he comes?”

She looked relieved, and nodded. I ran down the steps and cautiously
entered the little shop.

Lined up across the bench were no less than six of the one-tube
receivers which were the pinnacle of Dad’s electronic achievement. The
one at the end was turned back-to-front and had its rear shielding off;
a naked coil-form dangled unashamedly out.

And I saw what had happened to the two alarm clocks which had
disappeared from the bedrooms in the past six weeks. It happened that
then, as now, clocks were my passion, and I can remember clearly the way
he had set up pieces of the movements.

He had built a frame about four feet long on a shelf at right angles to
the bench on which the radios rested. At one end of the frame was a
clock mechanism designed to turn a reel on which was an endless band of
paper tape about eight inches wide. The tape passed under a hooded
camera—Mother’s old Brownie—which was on a wall-bracket and aimed
downward, on the tape. Next in line, under the tape, were six earphones,
so placed that their diaphragms (the retainers had been removed) just
touched the under side of the tape. And at the other end of the frame
was the movement from the second alarm clock. The bell-clapper hung
downwards, and attached to it was a small container of black powder.

I went to the first clock mechanism and started it by pulling out the
toothpick Dad had jammed in the gears. The tape began to move. I pulled
the plug on the other movement. The little container of black powder
began to shake like mad and, through small holes, laid an even film of
the powder over the moving tape. It stopped when it had put down about
ten inches of it. The black line moved slowly across until it was over
the phones. The magnets smeared the powder, which I recognized thereby
as iron filings. Bending to peer under the tape, I saw that the whole
bank of phones was levered to move downward a half an inch away from the
tape. The leads from each of the six phones ran to a separate receiver.

I stood back and looked at this goldberg and scratched my head, then
shook same and carefully blew away the black powder on the tape, rewound
the movements, refilled the containers from a jar which stood on the
bench, and put the toothpick back the way I had found it.

I was halfway up the stairs when the scream of burning rubber on the
street outside coincided with Mother’s sharp thumping on the floor. I
got to her side as she reached the front window. Dad was outside paying
off a taxi-driver. He never touched the porch steps at all, and came
into the house at a dead run. He had a package under his arm.

“Fred!” said Mother.

“Can’t stop now,” he said, skidding into the hallway. “Couldn’t get 27
anywhere. Have to use 25. Probably won’t work. Everything happens to me,
absolutely everything.” He headed for the kitchen.

“I got you a whole reel of 27, Dad.”

“Don’t bother me now. Tomorrow,” he said, and thumped downstairs. Mother
and I looked at each other. Mother sighed. Dad came bounding back up the
stairs. “You _what?_”

“Here.” I got the wire off the hall table and gave it to him. He
snatched it up, hugged me, swore I’d get a bicycle for my birthday (he
made good on that, and on Mother’s Fifth Avenue hat, too, by the way)
and dove back downstairs.

We waited around for half an hour and then Mother sent me to bed. “You
poor baby,” she said, but I had the idea it wasn’t me she was sorry for.

Now I’d like to be able to come up with a climax to all this, but there
wasn’t one. Not for years and years. Dad looked, the next morning, as if
he had been up all night again—which he had—and as if he were about to
close his fingers on the Holy Grail. All that day he would reappear
irregularly, pace up and down, compare his watch with the living-room
clock and the hall clock, and sprint downstairs again. That even went on
during my birthday dinner. He had Mother call up the office and say he
had Twonk’s disease, a falling of the armpits (to whom do I owe this
gem? Not my gag) and kept up his peregrinations all that night and all
the following day until midnight. He fell into bed, so Mother told me,
at one ayem Sunday morning and slept right through until suppertime. He
still maintained a dazzling silence about his activities. For the
following four months he walked around looking puzzled. For a year after
that he looked resigned. Then he took up stuffing newts and moles. The
only thing he ever said about the whole crazy business was that he was
born to be disappointed, but at least, this time, no one could rib him
about it. Now I’m going to tell you about Cordelia.

This happened the above-mentioned years and years later. The blow-off
was only last week, as a matter of fact. I finished school and went into
business with Dad and got mixed up in the war and all that. I didn’t get
married, though. Not yet. That’s what I want to tell you about.

I met her at a party at Ferris’s. I was stagging it, but I don’t think
it would have made any difference if I had brought someone; when I saw
Cordelia I was, to understate the matter, impressed.

She came in with some guy I didn’t notice at the time and, for all I
know, haven’t seen since. She slipped out of her light wrap with a
single graceful movement; the sleeve caught in her bracelet, and she
stood there, full profile, in the doorway, both arms straight and her
hands together behind her as she worried the coat free, and I remember
the small explosion in my throat as my indrawn breath and my gasp
collided. Her hair was dark and lustrous, parted widely in a winging
curve away from her brow. There were no pins in it; it shadowed the near
side of her face as she bent her head and turned it down and toward the
room. The cord of her neck showed columnar and clean. Her lips were
parted ever so little, and showed an amused chagrin. Her lashes all but
lay on her cheek. They stayed there when she was free and turned to face
the room, for she threw her head back and up, flinging her hair behind
her. She came across to my side of the party and sat down while the
Thing who was with her went anonymously away to get her drink and came
unnoticeably back.

I said to myself, “Henry, my boy, stop staring at the lady. You’ll
embarrass her.”

She turned to me just then and gave me a small smile. Her eyes were
widely spaced, and the green of deep water. “I don’t mind, really,” she
said, and I realized I had spoken aloud. I took refuge in a grin, which
she answered, and then her left eyelid dropped briefly, and she looked
away. It was a wink, but such a slight, tasteful one! If she had used
both eyelids, it wouldn’t have been a wink at all; she would have looked
quickly down and up again. It was an understanding, we’re-together
little wink, a tactful, gracious, wonderful, marvelous, do you begin to
see how I felt?

The party progressed. I once heard somebody decline an invitation to one
of Ferris’s parties on the grounds that he had _been_ to one of Ferris’s
parties. I had to be a little more liberal than that, but tonight I
could see the point. It was because of Cordelia. She sat still, her chin
on the back of her hand, her fingers curled against her white throat,
her eyes shifting lazily from one point in the room to another. She did
not belong in this conglomeration of bubbleheads. Look her—part Sphinx,
part Pallas Athene …

Ferris was doing his Kasbah act, with the bath towel over his head. He
will next imitate Clyde McCoy’s trumpet, I thought. He will then
inevitably put that lampshade on his head, curl back up his upper lip,
and be a rickshaw coolie. Following which he will do the adagio dance in
which he will be too rough with some girl who will be too polite to
protest his big shiny wet climaxing kiss.

I looked at Cordelia and I looked at Ferris and I thought, no, Henry;
that won’t do. I drew a deep breath, leaned over to the girl, and said,
“If there were a fire in here, do you know the quickest way out?”

She shook her head expectantly.

“I’ll show you,” I said, and got up. She hesitated a charming moment,
rose from her chair as with helium, murmured something polite to her
companion, and came to me.

There were French doors opening on to the wide terrace porch which also
served the front door. We went through them. The air was fragrant and
cool, and there was a moon. She said nothing about escaping from fires.
The French doors shut out most of the party noises—enough so that we
could hear night sounds. We looked at the sky. I did not touch her.

After a bit she said in a voice of husky silver,

_“Is the moon tired? she looks so pale_

_Within her misty veil:_

_She scales the sky from east to west_,

_And takes no rest_.

_“Before the coming of the night_

_The moon shows papery white;_

_Before the drawing of the day_

_She fades away.”_

It was simple and it was perfect. I looked at her in wonderment. “Who
wrote that?”

“Christina Rosset-ti,” she said meticulously, looking at the moon. The
light lay on her face like dust, and motes of it were caught in the fine
down at the side of her jaw.

“I’m Henry Folwell and I know a place where we could talk for about
three hours if we hurry,” I said, utterly amazed at myself; I don’t
generally operate like this.

She looked at the moon and me, the slight deep smile playing subtly with
her lips. “I’m Cordelia Thorne, and I couldn’t think of it,” she said.
“Do you think you could get my wrap without anyone seeing? It’s a—”

“I know what it’s,” I said, sprinting. I went in through the front door,
located her coat, bunched it up small, skinned back outside, shook it
out and brought it to her. “You’re still here,” I said incredulously.

“Did you think I’d go back inside?”

“I thought the wind, or the gods, or my alarm clock would take you
away.”

“You said that beautifully,” she breathed, as I put the coat around her
shoulders. I thought I had too. I notched her high up in my estimation
as a very discerning girl.

We went to a place called the Stroll Inn where a booth encased us away
from all of the world and most of its lights. It was wonderful. I think
I did most of the talking. I don’t remember all that passed between us
but I remember these things, and remember them well.

I was talking about Ferris and the gang he had over there every Saturday
night; I checked myself, shrugged, and said, “Oh well. _Chacun à son
goût_, as they say, which means—”

And she stopped me. “Please. Don’t translate. It couldn’t be phrased as
well in English.”

I had been about to say “—which means Jack’s son has the gout.” I felt
sobered and admiring, and just sat and glowed at her.

And then there was that business with the cigarette. She stared at it as
it lay in the ashtray, followed it with her gaze to my lips and back as
I talked, until I asked her about it.

She said in a soft, shivery voice, “I feel just like that cigarette.” I,
of course, asked her why.

“You pick it up,” she whispered, watching it. “You enjoy some of it. You
put it down and let it—smolder. You like it, but you hardly notice it …”

I thereupon made some incredibly advanced protestations.

And there was the business about her silence—a long, faintly amused,
inward-turning silence. I asked her what she was thinking about.

“I was ruminating,” she said in a self-deprecating, tragic voice, “on
the futility of human endeavor,” and she smiled. And when I asked her
what she meant, she laughed aloud and said, “Don’t you know?” And I
said, “Oh. That,” and worshipped her. She was deep. I’d have dropped
dead before I’d have admitted I didn’t know what specifically she was
driving at.

And books. Music, too. When were at the stage where I had both her hands
and for minutes on end our foreheads were so close together you couldn’t
have slipped a swizzle stick between them, I murmured, “We seem to think
so much alike.… Tell me Cordelia, have you read Cabell?”

She said, “Well, really,” in such a tone that, so help me, I apologized.
“Lovely stuff,” I said, recovering.

She looked reminiscently over my shoulder, smiling her small smile. “So
lovely.”

“I knew you’d read him,” I said, struck with sweet thunder. “And
Faulkner—have you read any of Faulkner?”

She gave me a pitying smile. I gulped and said, “Ugly, isn’t it?”

She looked reminiscently over my other shoulder, a tiny frown flickering
in her flawless brow. “So ugly,” she said.

In between times she listened importantly to my opinions on Faulkner and
Cabell. And Moussorgsky and Al Jolson. She was wonderful, and we agreed
in everything.

And, hours later, when I stood with her at her door, I couldn’t do a
thing but shuffle my feet and haul on the hem of my jacket. She gave me
her hand gravely, and I think I stopped breathing. I said, “Uh, well,”
and couldn’t improve on it. She swept her gaze from my eyes to my mouth,
from side to side across my forehead; it was a tortured “No!” her
slightly turning head articulated, and her whole body moved minutely
with it. She let go my hand, turned slowly toward the door, and then,
with a cry which might have been a breath of laughter and which might
have been a sob, she pirouetted back to me and kissed me—not on the
mouth, but in the hollow at the side of my neck. My fuse blew with a
snap and a bright light and, as it were, incapacitated my self-starter.
She moved deftly then, and to my blurred vision, apparently changed
herself into a closed door. I must have stood looking at that door for
twenty minutes before I turned and walked dazedly home.

I saw her five more times. Once it was a theater party, and we all went
to her house afterward, and she showed great impartiality. One it was a
movie, and who should we run into afterward but her folks. Very nice
people, I liked them and I think they liked me. Once it was the circus;
we stayed very late, dancing at a pavilion, and yet the street was still
crowded outside her home when we arrived there, and a handshake had to
do. The fourth time was at a party to which I went alone because she had
a date that night. It devolved that the date was the same party. The way
she came in did things to me. It wasn’t the fact that she was with
somebody else; I had no claim on her, and the way she acted with me made
me feel pretty confident. It was the way she came in, slipping out of
her wrap, which—caught on her—bracelet, freezing her in a profile while
framed in the doorway.… I don’t want to think about it. Not now.

I did think about it; I left almost immediately so that I could. I went
home down and slumped down in an easy chair and convinced myself about
coincidences, and was almost back to normal when Dad came into the room.

_“Argh!”_ he said.

I leapt out of the chair and helped him to pick himself up off the
middle of the rug. “Blast it, boy,” he growled, “Why don’t you turn on a
light? What are you doing home? I thought you were out with your
goddess. Why can’t you pick up your big bony feet, or at least leave
them somewhere else besides in the doorway of a dark room?” He dusted
off his knees. He wasn’t hurt. It’s a deep-piled rug with two cushions
under it. “You’re a howling menace. Kicking your father.” Dad had
mellowed considerably with the years. “What’s the matter with you
anyhow? She do you something? Or are you beginning to have doubts?” He
wore glasses now, but he saw plenty. He’d ribbed me about Cordelia as
can only a man who can’t stand ribbing himself.

“It was a lousy party,” I said.

He turned on a light, “What’s up, Henry?”

“Nothing,” I said. “Absolutely nothing. I haven’t had a fight with her,
if that’s what you’re digging for.”

“All right, then,” he said, picking up the paper.

“There’s nothing wrong with her. She’s one of the most wonderful people
I know, that’s all.”

“Sure she is.” He began to read the paper.

“She’s deep, too. A real wise head, she is. You wouldn’t expect to find
that in somebody as young as that. Or as good-looking.” I wished he
would put his eyebrows down.

“She’s read everything worth reading,” I added as he turned a page a
minute later.

“Marvelous,” he said flatly.

I glared at him. “What do you mean by that?” I barked. “What’s
marvelous?”

He put the paper down on his knee and smoothed it. His voice was gentle.
“Why Cordelia, of course. I’m not arguing with you, Henry.”

“Yes you—well, anyway, you’re not saying what you think.”

“You don’t want to hear what I think.”

“I know what I want!” I flared.

He crackled the paper nervously. “My,” he said as if to himself, “this
is worse than I thought.” Before I could interrupt, he said, “Half of
humanity doesn’t know what it wants or how to find out. The other half
knows what it wants, hasn’t got it, and is going crazy trying to
convince itself that it already has it.”

“Very sound,” I said acidly. “Where do you peg me?”

He ignored this. “The radio commercial which annoys me most,” he said
with apparent irrelevancy, “is the one which begins, ‘There are some
things so good they don’t have to be improved.’ That annoys me because
there isn’t a thing on God’s green earth which couldn’t stand
improvement. By the same token, if you find something which looks to you
as if it’s unimprovable, then either it’s a mirage or you’re out of your
mind.”

“What has that to do with Cordelia?”

“Don’t snap at me, son,” Dad said quietly. “Let’s operate by the rule of
reason here. Or must I tear your silly head off and stuff it down your
throat?”

I grinned in spite of myself. “Reason prevails, Dad. Go on.”

“Now, I’ve seen the girl, and you’re right; she’s striking to look at.
Extraordinary. In the process of raving about that you’ve also told me
practically every scrap of conversation you’ve ever had with her.”

“I have?”

“You’re like your mother; you talk too much,” he smiled. “Don’t get
flustered. It was good to listen to. Shows you’re healthy. But I kept
noticing one thing in these mouthings—all she’s read, all the languages
she understands, all the music she likes—and that is that you have never
quoted her yet as saying a single declarative sentence. You have never
quoted her as opening a conversation, changing the subject, mentioning
something you both liked _before_ you mentioned it, or having a single
idea that you didn’t like.” He shrugged. “Maybe she is a good listener.
They’re—”

“Now wait a minute—”

“—They’re rare anywhere in the world, especially in this house,” he went
on smoothly. “Put your hands back in your pockets, Henry, or sit on ’em
until I’ve finished. Now, I’m not making any charges about Cordelia.
There aren’t any. She’s wonderful. That’s the trouble. For Pete’s sake,
get her to make a flat statement.”

“She has, plenty of times,” I said hotly. “You just don’t know her! Why,
she’s the most—”

He put up his hands and turned his head as if I were aiming a bucket of
water at him. “Shut up!” he roared. I shut. “Now,” he said, “Listen to
me. If you’re right, you’re right and there’s no use defending anything.
If you’re wrong you’d better find it out soon before you get hurt. But I
don’t want to sit here and watch the process. I know how you tick,
Henry. By gosh, I ought to. You’re like I was. You and I, we get a hot
idea and go all out for it, all speed and no control. We spill off at
the mouth until we have the whole world watching, and when the idea
turns sour the whole world gets in its licks, standing around laughing.
Keep your beautiful dreams to yourself. If they don’t pan out, you can
always kick yourself effectively enough, without having every wall-eyed
neighbor helping you.”

A picture of Mr. Bohackus with the protruding china-blue eyes, our
neighbor of long ago, crossed my mind, and I chuckled.

“That’s better, Henry,” said Dad. “Listen. When a fellow gets to be a
big, grown-up man, which is likely to happen at my age, or never, he
learns to make a pile of his beloved failures and consign them to the
flames, and never think of them again. But it ought to be a private
bonfire.”

It sounded like sense, particularly the part about not having to defend
if it was right enough to be its own defense. I said, “Thanks, Dad. I’ll
have to think. I don’t know if I agree with you … I’ll tell you
something, though. If Cordelia turned out to be nothing but a
phonograph, I’d consider it a pleasure to spend the rest of my life
buying new records for her.”

“That’d be fine,” said Dad, “if it was what you wanted. I seriously
doubt that it is just now.”

“Of course it isn’t. Cordelia’s all woman and has a wonderful mind, and
that’s what I want.”

“Bless you, my children,” Dad said, and grinned.

I knew I was right, and that Dad was simply expressing a misguided
caution. The Foxy Grandpa routine, I thought, was a sign of advancing
age. Dad sure was changed since the old days. On the other hand, he
hadn’t been the same since the mysterious frittering-out of his
mysterious down-cellar project. I stopped thinking about Dad, and turned
my mind to my own troubles.

I had plenty of time to think; I couldn’t get a Saturday date with her
for two weeks, and I wanted this session to run until it was finished
with no early curfews. Not, as I have said, that I had any doubts. Far
from it. All the same, I made a little list …

I don’t think I said ten words to her until we were three blocks from
her house. She quite took my breath away. She was wearing a green suit
with surprising lapels that featured her fabulous profile and made me
ache inside. I had not known that I was so hungry for a sight of her,
and now she was more than a sight, now her warm hand had slipped into
mine as we walked. “Cordelia …” I whispered.

She turned her face to me, and showed me the tender tuggings in the
corners of her mouth. She made an interrogative sound, like a sleepy
bird.

“Cordelia,” I said thickly. It all came out in a monotone. “I didn’t
know I could miss anybody so much. There’s been a hollow place in my
eyes, wherever I looked; it had no color and it was shaped like you. Now
you fill it and I can see again.”

She dropped her eyes and her smile was a thing to see. “You said that
beautifully,” she breathed.

I hadn’t thought of that. What I had said was squeezed out of me like
toothpaste out of a tube, with the same uniformity between what came out
and what was still inside.

“We’ll go to the Stroll Inn,” I said. It was where we met. We didn’t
meet at the party. We just saw each other there. We met in that booth.

She nodded gravely and walked with me, her face asleep, its attention
turned inward, deeply engaged. It was not until we turned the corner on
Winter Street and faced the Inn that I thought of my list; and when I
did, I felt a double, sickening impact—first, one of shame that I should
dare to examine and experiment with someone like this, second, because
item 5 on that list was “You said that beautifully …”

The Stroll Inn, as I indicated before, has all its lights, practically,
on the outside. Cordelia looked at me thoughtfully as we walked into
their worming neon field. “Are you all right?” she asked. “You look
pale.”

“How can you tell?” I asked, indicating the lights, which flickered and
switched, orange and green and blue and red. She smiled appreciatively,
and two voices spoke within me. One said joyfully, “ ‘You look pale’ is
a declarative statement.” The other said angrily, “You’re hedging. And
by the way, what do you suppose that subtle smile is covering up, if
anything?” Both voices spoke forcefully, combining in a jumble which
left me badly confused. We went in and found a booth and ordered dinner.
Cordelia said with pleasure that she would have what I ordered.

Over the appetizer I said, disliking myself intensely, “Isn’t this
wonderful? All we need is a moon. Can’t you see it, hanging up there
over us?”

She laughed and looked up, and sad sensitivity came into her face. I
closed my eyes, waiting.

_“ ‘Is the moon tired? She looks so pale_—_’ ”_ she began.

I started to chew again. I think it was marinated herring, and very good
too, but at the moment it tasted like cold oatmeal with a dash of warm
lard. I called the waiter and ordered a double rum and soda. As he
turned away I called him back and asked him to bring a bottle instead. I
needed help from somewhere, and pouring it out of a bottle seemed a fine
idea at the time.

Over the soup I asked her what she was thinking about. “I was
ruminating,” she said in a self-deprecating, tragic voice, “on the
futility of human endeavor.” Oh, brother, me too, I thought. Me too.

Over the dessert we had converse again, the meat course having passed
silently. We probably presented a lovely picture, the two of us
wordlessly drinking in each other’s presence, the girl radiating an
understanding tenderness, the young man speechless with admiration. Look
how he watches her, how his eyes travel over her face, how he sighs and
shakes his head and looks back at his plate.

I looked across the Inn. In a plate-glass window a flashing neon sign
said bluely, “nnI llortS. NnI llortS.”

“Nnillorts,” I murmured.

Cordelia looked up at me expectantly, with her questioning sound. I
tensed. I filled the jigger with rum and poured two fingers into my
empty highball glass. I took the jigger in one hand and the glass in the
other.

I said, “You’ve read Kremlin von Schtunk, the Hungarian poet?” and drank
the jigger.

“Well, really,” she said pityingly.

“I was just thinking of his superb line, ‘Nni llorts, nov shmoz ka
smörgasbord,’ ” I intoned, “which means—” and I drank the glass.

She reached across the table and touched my elbow. “Please. Don’t
translate. It couldn’t be phrased as well in English.”

Something within me curled up and died. Small, tight, cold and dense,
its corpse settled under my breastbone. I could have raged at her, I
supposed. I could have coldly questioned her, pinned her down, stripped
from her those layers of schooled conversational reactions, leaving her
ignorance in nakedness. But what for? I didn’t want it … And I could
have talked to her about honesty and ethics and human aims—why did she
do it? What did she ever hope to get? Did she think she would ever
corral a man and expect him to be blind, for the rest of his life, to
the fact that there was nothing behind this false front—nothing at all?
Did she think that—did she think? No.

I looked at her, the way she was smiling at me, the deep shifting
currents which seemed to be in her eyes. She was a monster. She was some
graceful diction backed by a bare half-dozen relays. She was a
card-file. She was a bubble, thin-skinned, covered with swirling,
puzzling, compelling colors, filled with nothing. I was hurt and angry
and, I think, a little frightened. I drank some more rum. I ordered her
a drink and then another, and stayed ahead of her four to one. I’d have
walked out and gone home if I had been able to summon the strength. I
couldn’t. I could only sit and stare and bathe myself in agonized
astonishment. She didn’t mind. She sat listening as raptly to my silence
as to my conversation. Once she said, “We’re just _being _together,
aren’t we?” and I recognized it as another trick from the bag. I
wondered how many she might come up with if I just waited.

She came up with plenty.

She sat up and leaned forward abruptly. I had the distinct feeling that
she was staring at me—her face was positioned right for it—but here eyes
were closed. I put my glass down and stared blearily back, thinking, now
what?

Her lips parted, twitched, opened wide, pursed. They uttered a glottal
gurgling which was most unpleasant. I pushed my chair back, startled.
“Are you sick?”

“Are you terrestrial?” she asked me.

“Am I _what?_”

“Making—contact thirty years,” she said. Her voice was halting, filled
with effort.

“What are you talking about?”

“Terrestrial power quickly going,” she said clearly. “Many—uh—much power
making contact this way very high frequencies thought. Easy radio. Not
again thought. Take radio code quickly.”

“Listen, toots,” I said nastily, “This old nose no longer has a ring in
it. Go play tricks on somebody else.” I drank some more rum. An I.Q. of
sixty, and crazy besides. “You’re a real find, you are,” I said.

“Graphic,” she said. “Uh—write. Write. Write.” She began to claw the
table cloth. I looked at her hand. It was making scribbling motions.
“Write write.”

I flipped a menu over and put it in front of her and gave her my pen.

Now, I read an article once on automatic writing—you know, that
spiritualist stuff. Before witnesses, a woman once wrote a long letter
in trance in an unfamiliar (to her) hand, at the astonishing rate of
four hundred and eight words a minute. Cordelia seemed to be out to
break that record. That pen-nib was a blur. She was still leaning
forward rigidly, and her eyes were still closed. But instead of a
blurred scrawl, what took shape under her flying hand was a neat list or
chart. There was an alphabet of sorts, although not arranged in the
usual way; it was more a list of sounds. And there were the numbers one
to fourteen. Beside each sound and each number was a cluster of regular
dots which looked rather like Braille. The whole sheet took her not over
forty-five seconds to do. And after she finished she didn’t move
anything except her eyelids which went up. “I think,” she said
conversationally, “that I’d better get home, Henry. I feel a little
dizzy.”

I felt a little more than that. The rum, in rum’s inevitable way, had
sneaked up on me, and suddenly the room began to spin, diagonally, from
the lower right to the upper left. I closed my eyes tight, opened them,
fixed my gaze on a beer-tap on the bar at the end of the room, and held
it still until the room slowed and stopped. “You’re so right,” I said,
and did a press-up on the table top to assist my legs. I managed to help
Cordelia on with her light coat. I put my pen back in my pocket (I found
it the next morning with the cap still off and a fine color scheme in
the lining of my jacket) and picked up the menu.

“What’s that?” asked Cordelia.

“A souvenir,” I said glumly. I had no picture, no school ring, no
nothing. Only a doodle. I was too tired, twisted, and tanked to wonder
much about it, or about the fact that she seemed never to have seen it
before. I folded it in two and put it in my hip pocket.

I got her home without leaning on her. I don’t know if she was ready to
give a repeat performance of that goodnight routine. I didn’t wait to
find out. I took her to the door and patted her on the cheek and went
away from there. It wasn’t her fault.…

When I got to our house, I dropped my hat on the floor in the hall and
went into the dark living-room and fell into the easy-chair by the door.
It was a comfortable chair. I felt about as bad as I ever had. I
remember wondering smokily whether anyone ever loves a person. People
seem to love dreams instead, and for the lucky ones, the person is close
to the dream. But it’s a dream all the same, a sticky dream. You unload
the person and the dream stays with you.

What was it Dad had said? “When a fellow gets to be a big grownup
man … he learns to make a pile of his beloved failures and consign them
to the flames.” “Hah!” I ejaculated, and gagged. The rum tasted
terrible. I had nothing to burn but memories and the lining of my
stomach. The latter was flaming merrily. The former stayed where they
were. The way she smiled, so deep and secret …

Then I remembered the doodle. Her hands had touched it, her mind had—No,
her mind hadn’t. It could have been anyone’s mind, but not hers. The
girl operated under a great handicap. No brains. I felt terrible. I got
up out of the chair and wove across the room, leaning on the mantel. I
put my forehead on the arm which I had put on the mantel, and with my
other hand worried the menu out of my pocket. With the one hand and my
teeth I tore it into small pieces and dropped the pieces in the grate,
all but one. Then I heaved myself upright, braced my shoulder against
the mantel, which had suddenly begun to bob and weave, got hold of my
lighter, coaxed a flame out of it and lit the piece I’d saved. It burned
fine. I let it slip into the grate. It flickered, dimmed, caught on
another piece of paper, flared up again. I went down on one knee and
carefully fed all the little pieces to the flame. When it finally went
out I stirred the ashes around with my finger, got up, wiped my hands on
my pants, said, “That was good advice Dad gave me,” and went back to the
chair. I went back into it, pushed my shoes off my feet, curled my legs
under me and, feeling much better, dozed off.

I woke slowly, some time later, and with granulated eyelids and a mouth
full of emory and quinine. My head was awake but my legs were asleep and
my stomach had its little hands on my backbone and was trying to pull it
out by the roots. I sat there groggily looking at the fire.

Fire? What fire? I blinded and winced; I could almost hear my eyelids
rasping.

There was a fire in the grate. Dad was kneeling beside it, feeding it
small pieces of paper. I didn’t say anything; I don’t think it occurred
to me. I just watched.

He let the fire go out after a while; then he stirred the ashes with his
finger and stood up with a sigh, wiping his hands on his pants. “Good
advice I gave the boy. Time I took it myself.” He loomed across the
shadowy room to me, turned around and sat down in my lap. He was relaxed
and heavy, but he didn’t stay there long enough for me to feel it.
“Gah!” he said, crossed the room again in one huge bound, put his back
against the mantel and said, “Don’t move, you, I’ve got a gun.”

“It’s me, Dad.”

“Henry! Bythelordharry, you’ll be the death of me yet. That was the most
inconsiderate thing you have ever done in your entire selfish life. I’ve
a notion to bend this poker over your Adam’s apple, you snipe.” He
stamped over to the book case and turned on the light. “This is the last
time I’ll ever—Henry! What’s the matter? You look awful! Are you all
right?”

“I’ll live,” I said regretfully. “What were you burning?”

He grinned sheepishly. “A beloved failure. Remember my preachment a
couple weeks ago? It got to working on me. I decided to take my own
advice.” He breathed deeply. “I feel much better, I think.”

“I burned some stuff too,” I croaked. “I feel better too. I think,” I
added.

“Cordelia?” he asked, sitting near me.

“She hasn’t got brain one,” I said.

“Well,” he said. There was more sharing and comfort in the single
monosyllable than in anything I have ever heard. He hadn’t changed much
over the years. A bit heavier. A bit grayer. Still intensely alive,
though. And he’d learned to control those wild projects of his. I
thought, quite objectively, “I like this man.”

We were quiet for a warm while. Then, “Dad—what was it you burned? The
Martian project?”

“Why, you young devil! How did you know?”

“I dunno. You look like I feel. Sort of—well, you’ve finally unloaded
something, and it hurts to lose it, but you’re glad you did.”

“On the nose,” he said, and grinned sheepishly. “Yup, Henry—I really
hugged that project to me. Want to hear about it?”

Anything but Cordelia, I thought. “I saw your rig,” I said, to break the
ice. “The night you sent me out for the wire. You left the workshop
open.”

“I’ll be darned. I thought I’d gotten away with it.”

“Mother knew what you were up to, though she didn’t know how.”

“And you saw how.”

“I saw that weird gimmick of your, but it didn’t mean anything to me.
Mother told me never to mention it to you. She thought you’d be happier
if you were left alone.”

He laughed with real delight. “Bless her heart,” he said. “She was a
most understanding woman.”

“I read about the Martian signals in the papers,” I said. “Fellow
named—what was it?”

“Jenkins,” said Dad. “C. Francis Jenkins. He built a film-tape recorder
to catch the signals. Primitive, but it worked. Dr. David Todd of
Amherst was the man who organized the whole project, and got the big
radio people all over the world to cooperate. They had a five-minute
silence every hour during Mars’ closest proximity—August 1 to 3.”

“I remember,” I said. “It was my birthday, 1924. What got you so teed
off?”

“I got mad,” said my father, folding his hands over his stomach. “Just
because it had become fashionable to use radio in a certain way on
earth, those simple souls had to assume that the Martian signals—if
any—would come through the same way. I felt they’d be different.”

“Why should they be?”

“Why should we expect Martians to be the same? Or even think the same? I
just took a wild stab at it, that’s all. I tuned in on six wavelengths
at the same time. I set up my rig so that anything coming through on any
one wavelength would actuate a particular phone.”

“I remember,” I said, trying hard. “The iron filings on the paper tape,
over the ear-phones.”

“That’s right. The phone was positioned far enough below the tape so
that the magnetic field would barely contain the filings. When the
diaphragm vibrated, the filings tended to cluster. I had six phones on
six different wavelengths, arranged like this,” and he counted them out
on the palm of his hand:

1           2
3           4
5           6

“What could you get? I don’t figure it, Dad. There’d be no way of
separating your dots and dashes.”

“Blast!” he exploded. “That the kind of thinking that made me mad, and
makes me mad to this day! No; what I was after was something completely
different in transmission. Look; how much would you get out of piano
music if all the strings but one were broken? Only when the pianist hit
that note in the course of his transmission would you hear anything. See
what I mean? Supposing the Martians were sending in notes and chords of
an established octave of frequencies? Sure—Jenkins got signals. No one’s
ever been able to interpret them. Well, supposing I was right—then
Jenkins was recording only one of several or many ‘notes’ of the scale,
and of course it was meaningless.”

“Well, what did you get?”

“Forty-six photographs, five of which were so badly under-exposed that
they were useless to me. I finally got the knack of moving the tape
carefully enough and lighting it properly, and they came out pretty
well. I got signals on four of the six frequencies. I got the same
grouping only three or four times; I mean, sometimes there would be
something on phones 1, 2, and 4, and sometimes it would only be on 4,
and sometimes it would be on 2 and 6. Three and 5 never did come
through; it was fantastic luck that I picked the right frequencies, I
suppose, for the other four.”

“What frequencies did you use?”

He grinned. “I don’t know. I really don’t. It was all by guess and by
Golly. I never was an engineer, Henry. I’m in the insurance business. I
had no instruments—particularly not in 1924. I wound a 6000-meter coil
according to specs they printed in the paper. As for the others, I
worked on the knowledge that less turns of heavier wire means shorter
wave-lengths. I haven’t got the coils now and couldn’t duplicate ’em in
a million years. All I can say for sure is that they were all different,
and stepped down from 6000.

“Anyway, I studied those things till I was blue in the face. It must’ve
been the better part of a year before I called in anyone else. I wrote
to Mr. Jenkins and Dr. Todd, too, but who am I? A taxidermical broker
with a wacky idea. They sent the pictures back with polite letters, and
I can’t say I blame them … anyway, good riddance to the things. But it
was a wonderful idea, and I wanted so much to be the man who did the
job.… Ever want something so badly you couldn’t see straight, Henry?”

“Me?” I asked, with bitterness.

“It’s all over now, though. I’m through with crazy projects, for life.
Never again. But gosh, I did love that project. Know what I mean?”

“No,” I said with even more bitterness.

He sat straight. “Hey, I’m sorry, fellow. Those were rhetorical
questions. Maybe you’d better spill it.”

So I told it to him—all of it. Once I started, I couldn’t stop. I told
him about the moon poem and the “well, really” gimmick and the “please
don’t translate” routine, and the more I talked, the worse I felt. He
sat and listened, and didn’t say “I told you so,” and the idea was
worming its way into the back of my mind as I talked that here sat one
of the most understanding people ever created, when he screamed. He
screamed as one screams at the intrusion of an ice-cube into the back of
one’s bathing-suit.

“What’s the matter?” I said, breaking off.

“Go on, go on,” he gabbled. “Henry you idiot don’t tell me you don’t
know what you’re saying for Pete’s sake tell it to—”

“Whoa! I don’t even remember where I was.”

“What she said to you—‘Are you a terrestrial?’ ”

“Oh, don’t get so excited, Dad. It doesn’t mean anything. Why bother?
She was trying to interest me, I suppose. I didn’t let it get to me then
and I won’t now. She—”

“_Blast_ her! I’m not talking about her. It was what she said. Go on,
Henry! You say she wrote something?”

He wormed it all out of me. He forced me to go over it and over it. The
windows paled and the single light by the book case looked yellow and
ill in the dawn, but still he pounded at me. And I finally quit. I just
quit, out of compounded exhaustion and stubbornness. I lay back in the
big chair and glared at him.

He strode up and down the room, trying to beat his left hand to a pulp
with a right fist. “Of course, of course,” he said excitedly. “That’s
how they’d do it. The blankest mind in the world. Blank and sensitive,
like undeveloped film. _Of course!_ ‘Making contact thirty years’ they
said. ‘Much power making contact this way—very high frequencies
thought.’ A radionic means of transmitting thought, and it uses too much
power to be practical. ‘Easy radio. Not again thought.’ ”

He stopped in front of me, glaring. “ ‘Not again thought,’ ” he growled.
“You—you _dope!_ How could my flesh and blood be so abjectly stupid?
There in your hands you held the interplanetary Rosetta Stone, and what
did you do with it?”

I glared back at him. “I was quote consigning one of my beloved failures
to the flames end quote,” I said nastily.

Suddenly he was slumped and tired. “So you were, son. So you were. And
it was all there—little Braille, you said. A series of phonetic symbols,
and almost a certainly a list of the frequency-octave they use. And—and
all my pictures.… I burned them too.” He sat down.

“Henry—”

“Don’t take it so hard, Dad,” I said. “Your advice was good. You forget
your Martians and I’ll forget my moron. When a fellow get to be a
grown-up man—”

He didn’t hear me. “Henry. You say her folks like you?”

I sprang to my feet. “NO!” I bellowed. “Dad, I will not, repeat, _not_
under any circumstances woo that beautiful package of brainless
reflexes. I have had mine. I—”

“You really mean it, don’t you?”

“That I do,” I said positively.

“Well,” he said dejectedly, “I guess that’s that.”

And that old, old fever came back into his face.

“Dad—”

He slowly straightened up, that hot “Land ho!” expression in his eyes.
My father is hale, handsome, and, when he wants to be, extremely
persistent.

“Now, Dad,” I said. “Let’s be reasonable. She’s very young, Dad. Now,
let’s talk this thing over a little more, Dad. You can’t go following a
girl all over the house with a notebook and pencil. They said they
wouldn’t use the thought contact again. Dad. Now Dad—”

“Your mother would understand if she were alive,” he murmured.

“No! You can’t!” I bawled. “Dad, for heaven’s sake use your head! Why
you—Cordelia—Dad, she’d make me call her _Mummy!_”

Now what am I going to do?



DIE, MAESTRO, DIE!


I finally killed Lutch Crawford with a pair of bolt-cutters. And there
was Lutch—all of him, all his music, his jump, his public and his pride,
in the palm of my hand. Literally in the palm of my hand—three pinkish
slugs with horn at one end and blood at the other. I tossed ’em, caught
’em, put ’em in my pocket and walked off whistling _Daboo Dabay_, which
had been Lutch’s theme. It was the first time in eight years I had heard
that music and enjoyed it. Sometimes it takes a long while to kill a
man.

I’d tried it twice before. I tried it smart, and failed. I tried it
sneak, and failed. Now it’s done.

Whistling it, I can hear the whole band—the brass background: “Hoo Ha
Hoo Ha” (how he used to stage that on the stand, the skunk—Lutch, I
mean, with the sliphorns and trumpets turning in their chairs, blowing
the “hoo” to the right with cap-mutes, swinging around, blowing the “ha”
at the left, open) and then Lutch’s clarinet a third above Skid Portly’s
gimmicked-up guitar: “Daboo, dabay, dabay daboo …” You know, spotlights
on Lutch, a bright overflow of light on Skid and his guitar, light
bronzing and scything from the swinging bells of the trombones here and
the trumpets over there … the customers ate it up, they loved it, they
loved him, the bubbleheaded bunch of bastiches … and Fawn at the piano,
white glow from the spot running to her, gold flashes lighting up her
face when the brasses swung, lighting up the way she cocked her head to
one side, half smiling at Lutch, stroking the keyboard as if it was his
face, loving him more than anybody there.

And up in the back, in the dark, out of sight but altogether needed,
like a heart, there was always Crispin, crouching over the skins, his
bass a thing you felt with your belly rather than heard, but the real
beat coming through his hands, pushing out one crushed ruff for each
beat, shifting from center to edge—not much—matching the “hoo ha” of the
brass. You couldn’t see Crispin, but you could feel what he made. They
loved it. He made love with the skins. He was loving Fawn with the
pedal, with the sticks, there in the dark.

And I’d be out front, off to one side, seeing it all, and I can see it
now, just whistling the theme. It was all there—Lutch, everything about
Lutch, everything that Lutch was. There was the swinging brass, and
Crispin loving Fawn, and Fawn loving Lutch, and Lutch giving theme solo
to Skid’s guitar, taking the foolish obbligato for himself. And there
was Fluke, and that’s me. Sure, in the dark. Always keep Fluke in the
dark; don’t show them Fluke’s face. Fluke has a face that kept him out
of the United States Army, didn’t you know? Fluke has a mouth only as
big as your two thumbnails, and all his teeth are pointed.

I was as much a part of it as any of them, but I didn’t make anything. I
just worked there. I was the guy who waited for ten bars of theme, and
then coming in with the beat, holding the microphone just off my cheek
like a whisper-singer, saying “Lutch is here, Lutch is gone, man, gone.”
Lutch used to say old Fluke had a voice like an alto-horn with a split
reed. He called it a dirty voice. It was a compliment. “Gone, man,
gone,” I’d say, and then talk up: “Top o’ the morn from the top o’ the
heap, Kizd. This the Fluke, the fin of the fish, the tail of the whale,
bringin’ you much of Lutch and such … Lutch Crawford and his Gone Geese,
ladies and gentlemen, from the Ruby Room of the Hotel Halpern in …” (or
the Rainbow, or the Angel, or wherever). That was me, Fluke. I hadn’t
wanted the buildup, all that jive about “fin and the fish.” That was
Lutch’s idea. That was Lutch, like giving his theme solo to Skid’s
guitar, instead of taking it himself. He even hauled me into his
recording dates—you know that. That was the thing about that band; it
was a machine; and some will drive a machine, and some will ride it, and
Lutch, he rode.

I _had_ to kill him.

I’ll tell you about the time I tried it smart.

Five years ago, it was. We had an ivory man who was pretty good. Name
was Hinkle. He arranged a lot—he was the one who styled the band the way
you know it. You can forget him; he was killed. Went down to a dance
pitch in the South Side to hear a bass-player who was getting famous,
and some drunk started an argument and pulled a gun and missed the cat
he aimed at and hit Hinkle. It was none of Hinkle’s argument—he didn’t
even know anybody there. Anyway, he got iced and we had to play a date
without a piano. We got along, strictly ho-hum.

Then about eleven o’clock this baby shuffles up to the stand, all big
eyes and timidity. She pulled Lutch’s swallow-tail between numbers,
dropped it like it was hot, and stood there blushing like a radish. She
was only about seventeen, cute-fat, with long black hair and pink lips
like your kid sister. It took her three tries to lay out what she
wanted, but the idea was she played a little piano and thought she might
fill out a number for us.

Lutch was always an easy fall for anyone who looked like he wanted
something real hard. He didn’t think five seconds. He waved her over to
the ivory, and called for “Blue Prelude,” which had enough reed, soon
enough, that we could cover the piano if it soured.

We didn’t cover up a thing. The kid played Hinkle, perfect, pure and
easy; close your eyes and Hinkle was there, walking bass and third-runs,
large as life.

The rest of the date turned over to the kid, far as the band was
concerned. She pulled out a bag of tricks that I’ll never forget. She
had style and good wrists. She read like lightning and memorized better,
and she had a touch. Hell, I don’t have to tell you about Fawn
Amory … anyhow, we had a powwow, and Lutch had dinner with her folks.
Fawn had every disk Lutch Crawford had ever waxed—that was how she knew
Hinkle’s style—and she’d been playing piano since she was a pup. Lutch
hired her with her daddy’s blessing, and we had us a piano again.

We began to get big about then. It wasn’t so much Fawn’s playing—she
wasn’t brilliant, she was just terrific—but it was what she was to the
band. The music business is full of roundheels and thrushes who feed on
seed; this kid was from fresh air. She made the band worth staying with.
Turnover just stopped, except for a couple of times when a side-man
would carry too much altitude and make a pass. That never happened more
than once per man. Then one or the other of us would happily pull the
wolf’s teeth. Once Skid busted a four hundred dollar guitar over a guy’s
head for that. (A good thing in the long run; he went into electrics
seriously after that; but the electric guitar comes later.) And once I
gave a spare lip to a trumpet man, pushing three teeth out under his
nose, when his right hand forgot what his left was hired for.

She had this wide-eyed yen for Lutch when she joined us, and it was
there for anyone to see. But clean, dig me? Lutch, he treated her like
the rest of the sides. He kept it just like it was, and we went places.
I don’t think I was the only one who lost sleep. As long as no one made
a move, everything stayed the same and the band as a whole jatoed. We
rose, Jack.

It was Fawn who made the break. Looking back, I guess it could’ve been
expected. We were all pretty wise; we did what we did because we thought
it out. But she was just a kid. She’d been eating her heart out for too
long, I guess, and she had no muscles for a pitch like that. We were in
Boulder City that night, taking fifteen about two in the morning at a
roadhouse. There was all kinds of moon. I was in a wild hassle with
myself. Fawn was under my skin clear down to the marrow by then. I went
into the bar and slurped up a boilermaker—they always make me sick, and
I wanted a small trouble to concentrate on. I left the rest of the sides
jaw-jamming around a table and walked outside. There was a gravel path,
the kind that gives a dry belch under your feet. I stayed off it. I
walked on the grass and looked at the moon, which was bad for me, and
felt the boilermaker seething under my low ribs, and felt but rugged.
You know.

It wasn’t only Fawn. I realized that. It was something to do with Lutch.
He was so—sure of himself. Hell. I never could be that. Never until now,
when I’ve got what was coming to me. Now I’m damn sure where I’m going,
and I did it with my own hands. Not everybody can say that. But Lutch,
he could. He had talent, see—big talent. He was the real musician. But
he didn’t use it, only to guide with his fingertips. He styled Hinkle
still, and another man soloed his theme. He was like that. He was so
sure of himself that he didn’t have to hog anything. He didn’t even have
to reach out and pick up anything that he knew he could have. Now me, I
never could know till I tried. There shouldn’t be guys like Lutch
Crawford, guys that never have to wonder or worry. Them as has, gits,
they say. There can’t be any honest competition with a guy like that.
He’ll win out, or you will. If he does, he’ll do it easy as breathing.
If you do, it’s only because he let you. Guys like that shouldn’t be
born. If they are, they ought to be killed. Things are tough enough with
an even break. Lutch, he had a pet name for the band. He called it the
unit. That doesn’t sound like a pet name, but it was. Fluke was his
barker, and part of the unit … it didn’t matter that the band would be
just as good without me. Any one of us could be dropped or replaced, and
it would still be Lutch Crawford’s Gone Geese. But Fluke was in, and
Skid, and Crispin and the rest, and that’s the way he wanted it to stay.
I was in the bucks, with a future—thanks to him. Thank you very much to
him for every damn thing.

So I was standing on the grass looking at the moon and feeling all this,
when I heard Fawn sob. Just once. I went that way, walking on the grass,
sliding my feet so that left shoe wouldn’t squeak.

She was standing at the corner of the building with Lutch. She was
crying without making any more noise and without covering her face. It
was wet and sort of pulled down and sidewards as if I saw it through a
wavy glass.

She said, “I can’t help it, Lutch, I love you.”

And he said, “I love you too. I love everybody. It’s nothing to get sick
over.”

“It isn’t …” The way she said that, it was a question and a whole flood
of detail about how sick you can get. “Let me kiss you, Lutch,” she
whispered. “I won’t ever ask you again. Let me this once. Once, I got
to, Lutch, I got to, I can’t go on much longer like this …”

Now, I hated him, and I think I hated her a little, for a second, but
you know, I’d of kicked him clear to Pensacola if he hadn’t done what
she said. I never had a feeling like that before. Never. I don’t want it
again.

Well, he did. Then he went back inside and got his clarinet and hit a
blue lick or two to call us back in, the same as always. He left her out
there, and me too, though he didn’t know I was there. Difference was, he
left me alone …

We finished the date somehow, Crispin and his heartbeat drums, and Skid
throwing that famous gliss all over the finger-board—he could really
glissando with that new guitar, that Crispin helped him design, but I’m
coming to that—and the horns and Fluke. Yeah, Fluke, real smooth: “Sweet
Sue now, kizd, the sweetest Sue we ever knew, featuring Fawn Amory, the
breeze on keys …” And Fawn ripples into the intro, and I give her a
board-fade on the p.a. system, and sigh in with, “Oh kizd, ain’t we got
Fawn …” and cut back to full volume on the piano mike. And I kept
spooning that corn back and back to myself, “Ain’t we got Fawn, ain’t we
got—”

Crispin was a big blond guy who was a graduate electrical engineer. He
earned his way through school playing drums, and after he graduated went
right on playing. If he’d gone into electronics the way he’d planned,
he’d of kept on playing drums. By the same token nothing could keep him
from messing with electronics while he was a trap man. He was forever
rehashing our p.a. system, and Skid’s git-box was like peanuts to him;
he kept coming back for more. Skid was amplified when he started with
us—a guitar’s pretty nowhere with a pickup in a band nowadays—but all he
had was a simple magnetic pickup clamped onto a regular concert guitar.
He had a few gimmicks too—a pedal volume control and a tone-switch on
the box that gave him a snarl when he wanted it. Trouble was, at high
volumes that pickup picked up everything—the note and the scratch of the
plectrum and the peculiar squeak of Skid’s calloused left fingers when
he slid them on the wound strings, so that a guitar solo always had a
background of pops and crackles and a bunch of guys whistling for
taxicabs.

Crispin, he fixed that. He was a big, good-natured cat that everybody
liked on sight, and sometimes when we went into a new town Crispin would
go down to Radio Row and talk some repairman into the use of his shop
for a couple days. Crispin would drag in Skid’s guitar amplifier and
haul its guts out and attach tone generators and oscilloscopes and all
like that, and after that would spend good sleeping time telling Skid
how to run the thing. After a couple of years Skid had an instrument
that would sit up and typewrite. He had a warble-vibrato on it, and a
trick tailpiece that he operated with his elbows that would raise a
six-string chord a halftone while he held it, and some jazz called an
attenuator that let him hit a note that wouldn’t fade, just like it was
blown out of an organ. Skid had a panel beside him with more buttons,
switches, and controls on it than a custom-built accordion has stops. He
used to say that the instrument was earning his keep—any three-chord man
from a hillbilly band could take his spot if he got that instrument. I
thought he was right. For years I thought he was right when he said
that.

It was before rehearsal the next day, that time in Boulder City, that
Crispin came to me and talked like with my mouth. I was in the sun-porch
thinking about that moon last night and all that went with it, about
Lutch and the way everything came so easy to him, he never had to make
up his mind. Crispin lounged up next to me and said,

“Fluke, did you ever see the time when Lutch couldn’t make up his mind?”

I said, “Brother,” and he knew I meant no.

He looked at his thumb, threw it out of joint. “Cat gets everything he
wants without asking for it. Never has to think of asking for it.”

“You’re so right,” I said. I didn’t feel like talking.

He said, “He rates it. I’m glad.” He was, too.

I said, “I’m glad too.” I wasn’t. “What brings up all this jive,
Crispin?”

He waited a long time. “Well, he just asked me something. He was
all—all—ah, he was like a square at the Savoy, shuffling his feet and
blushing.”

_“Lutch?”_ I demanded. Lutch usually came on like coke, all steam, no
smoke. “What was it?”

“It was about Fawn,” he said.

I felt something the size and weight of a cueball drop into my stomach.
“What’s with Fawn?”

“He wanted to know what the sides would think if he and Fawn got
married.”

“What’d you tell him?”

“What could I tell him? I said it would be fine. I said it didn’t have
to make any difference. It might even be better.”

“Better,” I said. “Sure.” Much better. Even if it was out of your reach,
at least you could dream. You could hope for some break, some way. Lutch
and Fawn … they wouldn’t fool around with this marriage kick, now.
They’d do it up right.

“I knew you’d think the same way,” he said. He sounded as if there was a
load off his mind. He slapped my back—I hate that—and walked off
whistling _Daboo Dabay_.

That was when I made up my mind to kill Lutch. Not for Fawn. She was
just part of it—the biggest part, yes; but I couldn’t stand this one
more trip his way of the silver platter. I remember once when I was a
kid hitch-hiking. It was cold and I’d been at a crossroads near Mineola
for a long time. I began to wish real hard, hard like praying. A long
time later I remember what it was I wished for so hard. Not for a ride.
Not for some guy with a heater in his car to stop. What I wished for was
a whole bunch of cars to come along so I could thumb them. Dig me? The
biggest break I ever wanted was to have the odds raised for me, so I
could make my own way easier. That’s all anyone should have. Lutch, born
talented, good-looking, walking through life picking up gold
pieces … people like that shouldn’t live. Every minute they live, a guy
like us gets his nose rubbed in it.

For a second there I thought I’d quit, walk off, get clear. And then I
remembered the radio, the jukes, people humming in front of elevator
doors—and I knew I’d never get away from him. If he was dead it would be
different; I could be glad when I heard that jive. No, I had to kill
him.

But I’d play it smart.

For a couple of days I thought about it. I didn’t think about much else.
I thought about all the ways I’d ever heard about, and all the tricks
they use in whodunits to catch up on all the ways. I had about decided
on an auto accident—he was all the time driving, either with the band or
on quick trips for mail or spare reeds or music and all like that, and
the law of averages was in my favor; he never had accidents. I was
actually out casing the roads around there in Lutch’s car when I had one
of those fantastically unexpected pieces of luck that you dream about if
you’ve got a good imagination.

I’d just turned into the highway from the Shinnebago side road when I
heard sirens. I pulled over right away. A maroon Town-and-Country came
roaring around the bend of the highway at about eighty. There were
bullet holes in the windshield and the driver was hunched low. There
were two cats in the back blasting away with automatics. Behind them
came a State Police car, gaining. I didn’t wait and watch; I was out and
under before I knew what I was doing. Peering around the rear of my
machine, I looked up just as one of the men in the Town-and-Country
straightened up, holding his right forearm. Just then the driver hauled
the car into the road I’d just left. It couldn’t be done at that speed
but he did it, the tires screaming from Dizzy Gillespie; and the man who
was hit went sling-shotting out of the car. First he bounced and then he
slid. I thought he’d never stop sliding. About the time he hit the road,
the police car flashed by me with the right front tire flat. It was
crabbing left and crabbing right, and this time the tires were from Stan
Kenton.

The important thing is that that cat’s gun flew straight up in the air
when he was hit and landed in the weeds not twenty feet from me. I had
it before those cops got their car stopped. They never saw me. They were
busy, then with the car, afterward with the stiff. I walked down there
and talked to them. Seems these characters had been robbing gas stations
and motorists. They’d already killed two. One of the cops growled about
these war souvenir guns, and he’d be glad when all that foreign ammo was
used up. They said they’d get the guys who’d gotten away soon enough;
just a matter of time. I said sure. Then I got back in Lutch’s machine
and drove away, real thoughtful. I knew I’d never have another chance
like this.

The next afternoon I told Lutch I’d go in town with him. He was picking
up the mail and I said I had to go to the drug store. He didn’t think
anything about it. I went and got the gun and stuck it in the sleeve of
my jacket, under my armpit. It stayed there fine. It was a big Belgian
automatic. It had four shots left in it.

I felt all right. I thought I was doing okay until Lutch looked over at
me—he was driving—and asked me if I felt all right. Then I realized I
had sweat on my upper lip. I looked in the rear view mirror. I could
maybe two miles—we were out in the flats—and there wasn’t car in sight.
I looked ahead. There was a truck. It passed. Then the road was cleared.

I said, “Pull over to the side, Lutch. I want to talk to you.”

He looked at me, surprised. “I can listen and drive, Fluke. Shoot.”

Shoot, he said. I almost laughed. “Pull over, Lutch.” I meant to sound
normal but it came out as a hoarse whisper.

“Don’t be silly,” he said. He had that big easy open-handed way about
him, Lutch had. “Go on, Fluke, get it off your chest.”

I took out the gun and kicked off the safeties and poked it into his
ribs. “Pull over to the side, Lutch.”

He pulled up his arm and looked down under it at the gun. “Why, sure,”
he said, and pulled over and stopped. He switched off, leaned back into
the angle of the seat and the door so he half faced me, and said, “Lay
it on me, Fluke. You fixing to kill me with that?” He didn’t sound
scared, and that was because he wasn’t. He really wasn’t. Nothing like
this had ever happened to him, so nothing ever could. He wasn’t prodding
me, either. He was talking to me like at rehearsal. Lutch was a very
relaxed cat.

“Yes, I am,” I told him.

He looked at it curiously. “Where’d you get it?”

I told him that too. If he’d only started to sweat and cry, I’d have
shot him then. I hated him too much to just shoot him easy. I told him
all about it. “They haven’t caught those jokers yet,” I said. “The
cops’ll dig one of these slugs out of you and it’ll be the same as the
ones in those other killings. They’ll think those hoods did it.”

“They will? What about you?”

“I’ll have one of the slugs, too. In the arm. It’ll be worth it.
Anything else you want to know?”

“Yes. Why? Fluke, _why?_ Is it—Fawn?”

“That’s right.”

He sort of shook his head. “I hate to say this, Fluke, but I don’t think
killing me will help your chances any. I mean, even if she never finds
out.”

I said, “I know that, Lutch. But I’ll have an even break; that’s all I
ever want. I can’t get it with you around.”

His face was sorry for me, and that’s absolutely all. “Go on, then,” he
told me.

I pulled the trigger. The gun bucked in my hand. I saw him spin, and
then everything went black, like I was under a baby spot and the fuse
blew.

When I came to my eyes wouldn’t straighten out. The whole world was full
of dazzly black speckles and something globular was growing out of the
back of my head.

I was still in the front seat of the car. Something was scratching and
chafing at my wrist. I pulled it away and put my head in my head in my
hands and groaned.

“How you doing?” Lutch said. He bent forward, peering anxiously in my
face.

I got my handkerchief out and put it behind my heat and looked at it.
There was blood—just a speck. “What happened, Lutch?”

He grinned. It was a little puckered, but still a grin. “You’ll never
make a gunman, Fluke. I seen you twice with the gang in shooting
galleries. You’re afraid of guns.”

“How did you know that?”

“You always close your eyes real tight, screw ’em down before you pull a
trigger. I was half-turned toward you as it was, and it was easy to
twist aside. Turning made the gun ride around and slip back under my
arm. Then I hit you with my shoulder and ran your head back against the
door post. Does it hurt much?”

“I didn’t shoot you.”

“You tore hell out of my shirt.”

“God damn you, Lutch,” I said quietly.

He sat back with the arms folded, watching me, for a long time, until I
asked, “What are we waiting for?”

“For you to feel well enough to drive.”

“Then what?”

“Back to the club.”

“Come on Lutch; lay it on me. What are you going to do?”

“Think,” said Lutch. He opened the door and got out and walked around
the car. “Shove over,” he said. He was carrying the gun. He wasn’t
pointing it, but he was holding it ready to use. I shoved over.

I drove slowly. Lutch wouldn’t talk. I didn’t dig him at all. He was
doing just what he said—thinking. Once I took a hand off the wheel. His
eyes were on me immediately. I just felt the lump on my head and put the
hand back. For the time being I was hogtied.

When we stopped in front of the club he said, “Go on up to my room.” We
had quarters over the hall. “I’ll be right behind you with the gun in my
side pocket. If anyone stops you, don’t stall. Shake ’em naturally and
go on up. I’m not afraid of guns and I’ll shoot you if you don’t do what
I say. Do I mean it?”

I looked at his face. He meant it. “Well, all reet,” I said, and got
out.

No one stopped us. When we were in his room he said, “Get in that
closet.”

I opened my mouth to say something but decided not to. I got in the
closet and closed and locked the door. It was dark.

“Can you hear me?” he said.

“Yup.”

In a much softer voice he said, “Can you hear me now?”

“I can hear you.”

“Then get this. I want you to listen to every word that is said out here
until I open the door again. If you make a noise I’ll kill you.
Understand?”

“You’re in, Jack,” I said. My head hurt.

A long time—maybe two or three minutes—passed. From far away I heard him
calling, but couldn’t make out what he was saying. I think he was in the
stair landing. I heard him come in and shut the door. He was whistling
between his teeth. _Daboo, Dabay_. Then there was a light knock on the
door.

“Come in!”

It was Fawn. “What’s cookin’, good-lookin’?” she sang.

“Sit down, chicken.”

The chair was wicker. I could hear it plain.

Lutch Crawford always talked straight to the point. That’s how he got so
much work done. “Fawn, about the other night, with all that moon. How do
you feel now?”

“I feel the same way,” she said tightly.

Lutch had a little habit of catching his lower lip with his teeth and
letting go when he was thinking was hard. There was a pause about long
enough to do this. Then he said, “You been hearing rumors about you and
me?”

“Well I—” She caught her breath. “Oh, Lutch—” I heard the wicker, sharp
and crisp, as she came up out of it.

“Hold on!” Lutch snapped. “There’s nothing to it, Fawn. Forget it.”

I heard the wicker again, slow, the front part, the back part. She
didn’t say anything.

“There’s some things too big for one or two people to fool with, honey,”
he said gently. “This band’s one of ’em. For whatever it’s worth, it’s
bigger than you and me. It’s going good and it’ll go better. It’s about
as perfect as a group can get. It’s a unit. Tight. So tight that one
wrong move’ll blow out all its seams. You and me, now—that’d be a wrong
move.”

“How do you know? What do you mean?”

“Call it a hunch. Mostly, I know that things have been swell up to now,
and I know that you—we—anyway, we can’t risk a change in the good old
status quo.”

“But—what about me?” she wailed.

“Tough on you?” I’d known Lutch a long time, and this was the first time
his voice didn’t come full and easy. “Fawn, there’s fourteen cats in
this aggregation and they all feel the same way about you as you do
about me. You have no monopoly. Things are tough all over. Think of that
next time you feel spring fever coming on.” I think he bit at his lower
lip again. In a soft voice like Skid’s guitar with the bass stop, he
said, “I’m sorry, kid.”

“Don’t call me _kid!_” she blazed.

“You better go practice your scales,” he said thickly.

The door slammed.

After a bit he let me out. He went and sat by the window, looking out.

“Now what did you do that for?” I wanted to know.

“For the unit,” he said, still looking out the window.

“You’re crazy. Don’t you want her?”

What I could see of his face answered that question. I don’t think I’d
realized before how much he wanted her. I don’t think I’d thought about
it. He said, “I don’t want her so badly I’d commit murder for an even
chance at her. You do. If anyone wants her worse than I do, I don’t want
her enough. That’s the way I see it.”

I could of told him then that it wasn’t only him and Fawn that bothered
me; that that was just part of it. Somehow it didn’t seem to make no
never mind just then. If he wanted to play the square he was welcome to
it. “I’ll go pack,” I said.

He jumped up. “You’ll do no such a damn thing!” he roared. “Listen,
hipster; you’ve seen how far I’ll go to keep this unit the way it is.
You taught me something today, the hard way, and by the Lord you’re not
going to kick over this group just when you’ve taught it to me!” He
walked over and stood close; I had to crease the back of my neck to see
his face. He jabbed his fingers at my nose. “If you walk out on the unit
now, so help me, I’ll track you down and hound you to death. Now get out
of here.”

“All right,” I told him, “But listen. I’ll take a raincheck on that
last. You’re riding a high riff right now. Think it over quiet, and tell
me tonight if you want me to stay. I’ll do what you say.”

He grinned the old grin again. “Good, Fluke. See ya.”

It’s hard to hate a joe like that. But if you can make it, you can do a
job.

I made it.

So. That was the time I tried it smart. Next time I tried it sneaky.

We played the Coast, up and back. We did two rushes in feature pictures
and thirteen shorts. We guested on some of the biggest radio shows
going. We came back East after a lick at Chicago, where there was a
regular Old Home Week with Fawn’s folks, and we got three consecutive
weeks at the Paramount. We played ’em sleek, and had the old folks
smiling into each other’s eyes. We played ’em frantic, and blew the
roof. You know.

And every dollar that fell into our laps, and every roar of applause,
and every line of print in the colyums that drooled over us, I hated,
and there was plenty to hate. The Geese played so many different kinds
of music there was no getting away from it anywhere. I once saw a
juke-box with seven Crawford plates in it at once! There was Lutch with
the world throwing itself at his head because he was a nice guy. And
here I was in the gravy because he was good to me. And the whole world
was full of the skunk and his music, and there’d never be any rest from
it anywhere. (Did you hear the Hot Club of France’s recording of _Daboo
Dabay?_) A great big silk-lined prison for old Fluke; a padded cell.
Lutch Crawford built a padded cell and was keeping old Fluke in it.

Fawn got a little haggard, after that time in Boulder City, but she
gradually pulled up out of it. She was learning, the rest of us had
learned, to feel one way and act another. Well, isn’t that the
rockbottom starting point for anyone in show business? She was the
better for it …

We started West again, and South, and the time I tried it sneaky was in
Baton Rouge.

It was a road club again, real razzle, with curved glass and acoustic
ceilings and all that jazz. I can’t say that anything particular keyed
me off—it was just that I’d made up my mind a long time ago how I was
going to do it and I needed a spot near running water. Baton Rouge has a
fair-sized creek running past its front door, and Old Man River, he
don’t say nothin’.

It was very simple—it’s surprising how simple some things can be, even
things you’ve been eating your heart out over for years, when they get
fixed up at last … Lutch got a letter. The hat-check girl at the club
turned away to hang up a coat and when she turned back the letter was
there by the tip-plate. There were plenty of people in and out through
the lobby. I was, myself. The powder-room was downstairs; I was sick
that night. Everyone knew about it; they were laughing at old Fluke. I
am allergic to shrimps, and here I had to go and gulp up a pound or more
of New Orleans fried shrimp and rice: I had the hives that grease-paint
would barely cover, and could just about navigate, and I had to take a
trip down below every twenty minutes or so. Sometimes I stayed a long
while …

Lutch got the letter. It was sealed, addressed with a typewriter. No
return address. The hat-check girl gave it to the head-waiter who gave
it to Lutch. Lutch read it, told Crispin and Fawn he’d be back, he
didn’t know when, put on his hat and left. I don’t know what he thought
about on the way. The letter, I guess. It said

_Dear Lutch_,

_First, don’t show this to anyone or tell anyone about it yet. Make sure
no one is looking over your shoulder or anything like that_.

_Lutch, I’m half out of my mind over something I’ve heard. I think a
serious danger threatens my daughter Fawn, and I must talk to you. I am
in Baton Rouge. I don’t want Fawn to know it yet_.

_Maybe there is nothing in this business but it is best to play it safe.
I am waiting for you near a warehouse above Morrero—that is just
down-river from Baton Rouge. The warehouse has LE CLERC ET FILS painted
on the street side. I am in the office out near the end of the wharf. I
think you might be followed. Take a cab to the depot at Morrero and walk
to the river. You can’t miss it. But watch for a shadow, you can’t be
too careful. I hope all this turns out to be for nothing_.

_Bring this with you. If what I fear is true it would not be safe even
to burn it at the club. Please hurry_.

_Anxiously_

JOHN AMORY.

I’m proud of that letter. Fawn’s pop and Lutch were real buddy-buddy,
and the old man would never ask a favor unless it were real important.
The letter was the only evidence there was and Lutch brought it with
him. A nice job, if I do say so myself.

No one saw Lutch. The cab-driver didn’t know who he was or if he did he
never mentioned it later. Lutch came as soon as he could, knocked at the
door of the office. There was a dim light inside. No one answered. He
came in and closed the door behind him. He called out, softly, “Mr.
Amory!”

I whispered, from inside the warehouse, “In here.”

Lutch went to the inner door, stepped into the warehouse and stopped,
with the light from the office showing up the strip of skin between his
collar and his hair just fine. I hit him there with a piece of pipe. He
never made a sound. This time I wasn’t going to talk it over with him.

I caught him before he hit the floor and carried him over to the long
table beside the sink. The sink was already full of water, and I had
seen to it that it was river water, just in case. I put the pipe where I
could reach it in case I had to hit him again, and spread him out on the
table with his head over the sink. Then I dunked it, and held it under.

Like I thought, it revived him and he began to kick and squirm. The
burlap sacks I had laid on the table muffled that all right, and I had
him pretty firmly around the shoulders, with my elbow at the back of his
neck forcing his head under. I had one leg hooked under the sink
support. He didn’t have a chance, though it was hard work for a few
minutes.

When he was quiet again, and with five minutes or so over for good
measure, I got the small-boat anchor chain—an old rusty one it was—and
wound it around him secure but careless-like; it could be by accident. I
got the letter out of his pocket and burned it, grinding all the ashes
down on a small piece of roofing tin which I dropped into the river. I
rolled Lutch in after it. There was quite a current running—he started
downstream almost before he was under the surface. I said, “So long,
superman,” straightened myself, locked up the warehouse and, picking up
the car I’d parked two blocks away, drove back to the club. It was easy
to climb in the basement window into the stall of the men’s room I’d
left locked, and to come back upstairs without being noticed. The whole
thing had taken just forty-three minutes.

I was happy about the whole thing. The chain would hold him under, that
and the mud, and the catfish would make quick work of him. But if, by
some fluke, the body should be found, well, the chain could be an
accident, and he certainly died of drowning. In river water. The bump on
the back of his neck—that was nothing.

But Lutch Crawford was hard to kill.

[]

I don’t have to tell you about the next month or so, with the headlines
and all that jive that went on. The band went right ahead; Lutch’s hand
was always so light on it that his absence made almost no difference.
The sides worried some about him, but it took them three days to get
really panicked. By that time my mind was easy. No amount of police work
and private detective shenanigans could do a thing about it. The whole
band alibied me, and the hat-check girl too, with my hives. Matter of
fact, no one even thought to ask me any questions, specially. No one
remembered exactly what time Lutch left the club; there had been nothing
to call it to anyone’s attention. A clean job.

The next thing I wanted to do was to get clear of the whole aggregation
and go live by myself. I was careful, though, and made no move until
someone else did it first.

It came to a head six weeks after Lutch disappeared. We’d moved on to
Fort Worth, Texas. Fawn and Crispin hadn’t wanted to leave Baton Rouge,
but finally decided that Lutch, wherever he was, knew our schedule as
well as we did and would come back when he was ready to.

We had a big powwow in Fort Worth. Crispin took the floor. Everyone was
there.

Fawn still looked bad. She’d lost a lot of weight. Skid Portly looked
five years older.

Crispin came to the point as quick as Lutch used to.

“Gang,” he said, “don’t get your hopes up; I didn’t call you because I
have any new ideas about Lutch or where he might be. There’s no word.

“What brings this up is that after two weeks at Brownsville and a week
at Santa Monica, this tour is over. We have our pick of several
offers—I’ll go over them with you later—and we’ve got to decide right
now what we’re going to do. Lutch isn’t here and there’s no way of
knowing when he will show. We can either take a vacation after the Santa
Monica date, and hang up the fiddle until Lutch shows up, or we can go
on. What do you say?”

“I could use a rest,” I said.

“We could all use a rest,” said Crispin. “But what has us tuckered out
is this business of Lutch. If it wasn’t for that we wouldn’t think of a
break until next summer.”

Fawn said, “What would Lutch want us to do?”

Moff—Lew Moffatt, that was, the reed man—said, “I don’t reckon there’s
any doubt about that.”

There was a general mumble of agreement. Lutch would have gone on.

“Then we go on?”

Everybody said yes but me. I didn’t say. No one noticed.

Crispin nodded. “That leaves a big question. As far as performances are
concerned, we can get along. But someone has to take over booking,
contracts, a lot of the arranging, hotel accommodations, and so on.”

“What do you mean someone?” asked Skid. “Lutch did four men’s work.”

“I know,” said Crispin. “Well, do you think we can make it? How about
the arrangements? Skid, you and Fawn used to help him the most.”

Skid nodded. Fawn said, “We can do it.”

Crispin said, “I’ll handle the business, if it’s okay with you.” It was.
“Now, how about billing? We can’t phony it up; Lutch’s dis—uh—absence
has had a flock of publicity, and if Lutch doesn’t come back before we
start, we can’t bill him. The customers wouldn’t like it.”

They chewed that over. Finally Skid said, “Why’n’t you take it, Crisp?”

“Me? I don’t want it.”

The rest of them all started talking at once. Lutch and Crispin had
worked very close together. The general idea was that they wanted him to
do it.

Crispin had been lounging back against a long table. Now he stood up
straight. He said,

“All right, all right. But listen. This band is Lutch Crawford’s Gone
Geese, and if it’s all the same to you it’ll stay that way. We can bill
as Don Crispin and Lutch Crawford’s Gone Geese if you like; but I want
it so that wherever Lutch is, he’ll know that it’s still his band. That
means, too, that any new arrangement or novelty or what have you, is
going to be done the way Lutch would do it, to the very best of our
ability. If any one of you hears something in the band that doesn’t
sound like Lutch, speak up. I want it so that when Lutch comes back—damn
it, I won’t say _if_—when Lutch comes back he can pick up the baton in
the middle of a number and take over from there. Are you with it?”

They were. After the fuss had died down Koko deCamp, the hot trumpet
man, spoke up sort of timid. “Crispin,” he said, “I don’t want to cause
any hard feelings, but I have a standing offer with the King combo. My
contract with Lutch is up at the end of this tour, and I think I could
do myself more good with the King. That’s only—” he added quickly, “if
Lutch don’t come back.”

Crispin frowned and scratched his head. He looked over at Fawn. She said
again, “What would Lutch want him to do?”

Crispin said, “There it is. Lutch would let you do whatever you thought
you wanted. He never stopped anyone who wanted to leave.”

I could of told him. I didn’t.

Crispin went on, “There’s the code word, kizd, ‘What would Lutch want?’
Start from there. Anyone else want out? There’ll be no hard feelings.”

The bass man—we’d only had him a couple of months—said he thought he’d
go. Then I spoke up.

Fawn said, “Oh, no!”

“Why, Fluke?” asked Crispin. They all stared at me.

I spread my hands. “I want out, that’s all. Do I have to fill out a
questionnaire?”

“There won’t be any ‘Gone Geese’ without Fluke,” said Skid.

He was so right. The way they billed it was “Don Crispin and the Lutch
Crawford Orchestra.” Crispin and Fawn did their best to make me stay
with it, but no. Oh no. I was over, out and clear. I think Fawn figured
that it hurt me to stay close to the band, after Lutch had been so good
to me. Hell. I wanted to laugh, that was all, and I couldn’t do that
where the band could see me.

We broke up at Santa Monica after the date there. I thought I’d take it
easy for a year or so and look around, but what should drop into my lap
but a gold-plated offer from a radio station in Seattle, for a night
record-jockey stand. That was made to order. My voice and delivery and
savvy of the sharps and the flats were perfect for it, and best of all,
I could work where people didn’t have to look at my face. Sometimes I
think if I had been in radio from the start, I wouldn’t of—I might not
have become the kind of cat who—ah, that’s useless chatter now.

I got twenty-six weeks with options and could have upped the ante if I’d
wanted to argue, which I didn’t. Crispin and the rest of Lutch’s sidemen
went all out for me, sending me telegrams during my show, giving me
personal appearances, and plugging me in their clubs. Seemed like, dead
or alive, Lutch kept on being kind. I didn’t let it get me. I’d lived
long enough to know you can’t break clean from any close contact with a
human being. Quit a job, get a divorce, leave a home town, it drags on
in shreds and tatters that haunt you. I held tight to laughing. Lutch
was dead.

Then one night I got that advance shipment of Mecca records. Six sides
of Crispin-Crawford.

I gave it a big hello in the old Fluke style: “Aha, lil kizd—a clump of
jump for bacon to crisp-in; Crispin and Crawford, and six new plates for
gates. Just like old times for Fluke the Juke.… This spinner’s a winner:
old _Deep Purple_ in the Crispin crunchy style.”

I played it off. I hadn’t heard any of these plates yet, though they
were cleared for broadcast; they’d been delivered just before air time.
_Deep Purple_ was the old bandstand arrangement that Lutch had done
himself. Moff was playing Lutch’s clarinet, and there wasn’t enough
difference to matter. In the double-time ride in the third chorus, Skid
slipped in a lick on guitar that I hadn’t heard before, but it was well
inside the Crawford tradition. The other platters showed up the same
way; Crispin took a long drum solo in _Lady Be Good_ that was new, but
strictly Crawford. I held out the two new ones until last.

I mean new. There was a blow-top novelty called _One Foot in the Groove_
that I had never heard; the by-line was Moff and Skid Portly. The other
one was an arrangement of _Tuxedo Junction_. We’d always used a stock
arrangement for that one; this was something totally new. In the first
place it let in some bop sequences, and in the second place it really
exploited an echo chamber—the first that had been done on a Crawford
record. I listened to it bug-eyed.

It was good. It was _very_ good. But the thing that tore me all apart
was that it was Lutch Crawford, through and through. Lutch had never
used an echo before. But he would—he _would_, because it was a new
trend. Just like the be-bop continuities. I could imagine the powwow
before the recording session, and Fawn saying “What would Lutch want?”

Listening to it, I saw Lutch, wide shoulders, long hands, pushing the
brass this way, that way, reaching up and over to haul the sound of the
drums up and then crush them down, down to a whispering cymbal. I could
see him hold it down there with his right hand flat in the air in front
of him as if he had it on a table, long enough for him to catch his
lower lip between his teeth and pull it loose, and suddenly, then, like
a flash-bulb going off, dazzle the people with an explosion of
scream-trumpet and high volume guitar.

The turntable beside me went quietly about its work, with the sound-head
pulsing a little like a blood-pressure gauge. It hypnotized me, I guess.
Next thing I knew my engineer was waving frantically at me through the
plate glass, giving me a ‘dead-air’ sign, and I realized that the record
had been finished for seconds. I drew a thick rattling breath and said
the only thing in the world that there was—a thing bigger than me,
clearer than my scriptsheets or the mike in front of me or anything
else. I said stupidly, “That was Lutch. That was Lutch Crawford. He
isn’t dead. _He isn’t dead_.…”

Something in front of my eyes began bobbing up and down. It was the
engineer again, signalling. I had been staring straight at him without
seeing him. I was seeing Lutch. The engineer pointed downward, waggled
his finger round and round. That meant a record. I nodded and put on a
Crosby plate, and sat back as if I’d been lanced in the gut with a
vaulting pole.

My phone light flashed. I took calls on the show; the phones were
equipped with lights instead of bells so they wouldn’t crowd the mike. I
picked up the receiver, saying automatically, “Fluke the Juke.”

“One moment please.” An operator. Then, “Fluke? Oh, Fluke …” Fawn. It
was Fawn Amory.

“Fluke,” she said, her words tumbling over each other the way notes did
on her keyboard, “Oh Fluke, darling, we heard you, we all heard you.
We’re in Denver. We cut a date to catch your show. Fluke honey, you said
it, Fluke, you said it!”

“Fawn—”

“You said he isn’t dead. We know that, Fluke—we all do. But the way you
said it; you don’t know how much that means to us! We did it, you see?
_Tuxedo Junction_—we worked and worked—something that would be new and
would be Lutch too. Lutch can’t die as long as we can do that, don’t you
see?”

“But I—”

“We’re going to do more, Fluke. More Lutch, more real Lutch Crawford.
Will you come back, Fluke? We want to do more ‘Gone Geese’ records and
we can’t without you. Won’t you please, Fluke? We _need_ you!” There was
a murmuring in her background. Then,

“Fluke? This is Crispin. I want to double that, boy. Come on back.”

“Not me, Crispin. I’m done,” I managed to say.

“I know how you feel,” said Crispin quickly. He knew I was about to hang
up on him. “I won’t push you, hipster. But think it over, will you?
We’re going to keep on, whatever happens, and wherever Lutch is, alive
or—wherever he is, he’ll have a band, and as long as he has a band, he’s
here.”

“You’re doing fine,” I croaked.

“Just think it over. We can do twice as well if you’ll come back. Keep
in touch. Here’s Fawn again.”

I hung up.

I’ll never know how I got through that show. I know why I did. I did
because I was going to make my own way. That was why I had wanted to
kill Lutch. Come sick, come ça, as the man said, this was my kick—making
my own way without Lutch Crawford.

Six o’clock was closing time for me, and I imagine I got through the
routines all right; no one said anything to me about it. And if didn’t
answer the phone, and ignored requests, and played all the long stuff I
could get my hands on so I wouldn’t have to talk, well, they took it the
way any outfit will take guff from a guy they pay too highly.

I walked, I don’t know where. I suppose I frightened a lot of kids on
their way to school with that face of mine, and got a lot of queer looks
from women scrubbing their porch steps. I wouldn’t know. _Lutch isn’t
dead_ was the only thing that made. I can’t tell you all the things I
went through; there was a time of fear, when I thought Lutch was after
me for what I’d done, and a time of calm, when I thought it couldn’t
matter less—I could just go on minding my own business and let Lutch die
altogether, the way everybody has to. And there was a time of cold fury,
when I heard that new _Tuxedo Junction_ with the echoing guitar, and
knew that Crispin would keep turning new Lutch out—real Lutch, that no
one else in the music business could imitate. Lutch, he was talented
like three or four people, and there happened to be three or four people
with just those talents in his band. Anyway, it’s all a haze.

About ten o’clock it all clicked into the clear. I found myself on
Elliott Avenue away out near Kinnear Park—I must’ve walked miles—and
everything was squared away. _I hate Lutch Crawford_—I was left with
that, the old familiar feeling. And I still had to do something about it
because Lutch wasn’t dead.

I walked into a telegraph office and wired Crispin.

They started by giving me something I didn’t want—but wasn’t that the
whole trouble? This time it was a sort of surprise party and testimonial
dinner. I guess I was a little sour. They didn’t understand. Crispin, he
tried to make me feel better by guaranteeing that he’d see to it I was
paid twice over for breaking my radio contract. Fawn—well, Fawn
shouldn’t have been so sweet to me. That was a huge mistake. Anyway,
there was a dinner and some drinks and Crispin and Skid and Moff and
them got up one by one and said what a fine cat I was. Then they all sat
around playing “remember when” and passing remarks to the empty chair at
the head of the table where Lutch’s clarinet was. It was a fine party.

After that I went to work. What they saw me doing was “Is coming a
sizzle-swizzle for _Rum and Coca Cola_, featuring the Id-kid, Skid, and
his supercharged git-fiddle, so look out!” And “We got a dream-scheme,
kizd, all soft and lofty, smooth, forsooth, but full of nerve-verve. Hey
Moff, stroke these quiet cats with _Velvet Paws …_” So—I helped them.

What I was doing was trying to find Lutch so’s I could kill him. You
should have been a fly on the wall to hear those slave-sessions. Take a
tune, find old Lutch, mix ’em up, make ’em be something new that’s
styled like something they wouldn’t let be dead. So—they helped me.

I could have killed Lutch by killing the lot of them. I never did
discard that idea. But maybe I’m lazy. Somewhere in that aggregation was
the essence of what was Lutch. If I could smoke that out and kill it,
he’d be dead. I knew that. It was just a matter of finding out what it
was. It shouldn’t have been much trouble. Hell, I knew that outfit
inside out—performers, arrangements, even what they liked to eat. I told
you—there was damn little turnover there. And in the music business
people show up real soon for what they are.

But it wasn’t easy.

That outfit was like a machine made for a very special purpose—but made
all out of standard parts you could buy on the open market. That isn’t
to say that some of the parts weren’t strictly upper-bracket; all of
them were machined to a millionth. But I couldn’t believe that what
Lutch called “unit” was the thing that made the group an individual,
great one. If Lutch had been around, you could’ve said that Lutch made
the difference between a good machine and something alive. But Lutch
wasn’t around, and the thing still lived. Lutch had put the life in it,
by choosing the right pieces and giving them the right push. After that
the thing ran under its own power—the power of life—and Lutch Crawford
wouldn’t be dead until that life was gone. It was going to be him or me.

So I helped them. We had club and hotel dates, and we made records, and
in keeping Lutch alive, I helped them.

And they helped me. Every time a new tune started climbing the top ten,
every time someone came up with a number that looked like a winner, we’d
arrange it for the band; and in those sessions the band and workings of
every least part were torn down and inspected and argued over. I never
missed a word of this, so—they helped me.

It was hell for me. If you’ve got guts enough to kill a man, you’ve got
to finish the job. Lutch was alive. It was bad away from the band, with
every radio and juke-box in the whole world blasting out Crawford
creations. It was bad with the band—sometimes you could _see_ him!

Theme time at a club, and the lights the way they always were, and the
band the same, except that now Crispin’s luggage was front and center.
The swinging bells of the brass and their “hoo ha” and then Skid’s solo
_Daboo Dabay_ with Moff taking the obbligato on the clarinet. Moff never
stood out front to play, though. He was out of sight like Crispin used
to be. Crispin, crushing the beat, whisper-drumming, stared up and out
the way he used to when he was in the blackness, and Skid was no
different, watching his fingers … all the books say a good guitarist
never watches his fingers but I guess Skid never read them … but you
could see he was following _someone_, and it wasn’t Crispin, from under
his pulled-down eyebrows. But Lutch was there most of all for Fawn, Fawn
with the flickering golden light touching and leaving her face, and her
head tilted to one side so the heavy hair swung forward past her round
bare shoulder; and on her face that look, that half-smile, half-hungry
look—hungry like Lutch was there looking at her, not like he was away.

_Daboo dabay_ … it hypnotized those cats. We always opened with it, and
sometimes we had as many as three half-hour network spots, and that
meant theme opening and closing. It was always the same. I often
wondered if the customers who faithfully spattered out their applause at
the drop of a _hoo ha_ had any idea that this was different, this was
a—a resurrection, maybe eight times a night.

First I was sure it was the brass—the low brass, where that peculiar
vitality came from. You see, that was my protection—Lutch was strong in
everything we did, but you couldn’t _see_ him in anything but the theme.
When we did the theme I concentrated on what I heard, not on what it
meant. Anyway, night after night I waited for the theme, and cut out
everything but that low brass as I listened. It wasn’t notes I was
listening for, but tone—style—_Lutch_. After a week or so I pinned it
down to the second trumpet and a trombone. I was sure I was right; the
Crawford quality was somewhere down there where the tone was low and
full.

I got a break on it. So did Karpis and Heintz, the sliphorn and trumpet
men I’d singled out. See, they roomed together in a hotel we used during
Convention Week in Spokane. So one night they didn’t get to the club in
time to open. The hotel was an old firetrap—no escapes. The only way out
of their room was through the door. No phone. Small transom, and that
jammed and painted over. Locking the door from outside, putting a twist
of coat hanger in the key so it couldn’t turn, that was easy. It was
forty minutes before a bellhop let them out.

I heard the theme twice without those two sides. Crispin put it in a
nutshell when I asked him about it later. “Thin,” he said, “but it’s
still Lutch.” That was what I thought.

No one found out who had locked those boys in, of course. I don’t
operate so I can be found out. No one knew who was responsible when two
trumpets and a reed man got left miles behind us when we went to St.
Louis. We’d hired a bus and a couple of cars—we had a quartet and two
vocalists by then. And one of the cars just quit back there in the fog.
Who watered the gasoline? Some shmoe at a gas station, and let’s forget
it.

The theme wasn’t the theme on that date. I hadn’t knocked out the thing
that was Lutch—I’d knocked out the orchestra by pulling those men; we
were just nothing. That was no answer. I had to find the heart of Lutch,
and stop it, stop it so it could never beat again.

Somebody slugged Stormy, the bass, while he was asleep the second
afternoon in St. Louis. He went to the hospital and they got another man
quick. He wasn’t Stormy, but he was good. You could hear that the bass
was different—but the orchestra was still Lutch.

How long can you keep it up? Sometimes I thought I’d go crazy. Actually.
Sometimes I wanted to run out into the tables and smash the customers
around, because I thought that maybe they knew what I was looking for. I
was so close to it. That thing that was Lutch could cut in and cut out
during a number, and I’d never notice it, being so busy listening to one
instrument or combo. Someone out there could know, right in the same
room with me, and I wouldn’t. Sometimes I thought I was going out of my
mind.

I even got us a new piano player for a night. I had to come out in the
open for that, but it was safe. I hung around the conservatory until I
latched on to a kid who was all starry-eyed about Lutch Crawford. I made
like a talent scout. The kid was good-looking, with pimples. A
jack-rabbit right hand, like Art Tatum, or it would be in a few years. I
told Fawn about the boy, and said he was pining away. I laid it on. You
know. You know how old Fluke. And Fawn, her and her soft heart! she not
only agreed to let the kid in, but persuaded Crispin to let him take a
one-night stand!

He did. He was good. He read like crazy, and he played every note that
was on the paper and played ’em right; and he played a lot more he
dreamed up, and they were right too. But he wasn’t for the Geese. Now,
here’s a funny thing. It’s aside from the business of killing Lutch.
This kid was wrong for us, but so good Crispin spoke to Forway, the tour
manager, and today that kid’s making records that sell three quarters of
a million each. All because of the break I got him by way of getting
Fawn off the ivory for a night. Now what do you think of that?

I found out that night, though, that Fawn wasn’t the “Lutch” thing that
I was hunting. The band sounded like Lutch Crawford with the wrong
piano, that’s all. It wasn’t wrong enough to keep Lutch from being
there, somewhere in the sharps and flats. I wanted to run up to the
stand and rip the music apart with my hands and yell, “Come out of
there, you yellow skunk! Come out and let me get to you!”

I was glad it wasn’t Fawn. I’d have stopped her, if it was, but I
wouldn’t have liked doing it much …

And I _found_ him. I found him!

He had been right there all the time, looking at me, me looking at him,
and I hadn’t wits enough to see him.

Virus X and I found him. Virus X is something like flu, and something
like dysentery, and it’s no fun. It swept through us like a strong wind.
I got it first, and it only lasted a couple of days. Moff, now, he was
out two weeks. We only had to close for two nights, though. We made it
the rest of the time, sometimes with something like a full band,
sometimes with a skeleton. One of the short-timers was the guy who
played guitar—Skid Portly.

Skid always said that any hill-billy could do what he did, given his
guitar. I believed him. Why not? I’d diddled around with the instrument
myself. Put your finger behind a fret, pluck the string. With a pedal
you could make it louder or softer. With push-buttons you could make it
warble or snarl or _whuff!_ out with a velvet sound. With a switch you
could make it sound exactly like a harpsichord or an organ. With a lever
under your arm you could make all six strings rise in pitch like six
fire sirens rising together, to almost full tone. You didn’t play it.
You operated it.

Skid came down with Virus X, and called in a character called Sylviro
Giondonato, a glossy-haired, olive-skinned cat from East St. Louis. He
was bugeyed at the chance, like the pianist I’d found. He played a whole
mess of guitar, and when he got his hands on Skid’s instrument I thought
he was going to cry. He spent ten hours in Skid’s hotel room learning
the gimmicks on that box, with Skid, who was feeling rotten, coaching
him every step of the way. I know he did things on that guitar that Skid
wouldn’t dare to do. Giondonato had one of those crazy ears like
Rheinhardt or Eddie South—not that Eddie plays guitar.

The band played that night without Lutch.

Gionni—Johnny, we called him—was a star. The customers all but clawed
down the ceiling-beams. A big hit. But it wasn’t Lutch.

Crispin ripped off a momma-daddy on the tom after a while, our signal to
take fifteen. I don’t think I heard it. I was crouching at the corner of
the stand thinking over and over, _No Lutch! No Lutch!_ and trying not
to laugh. It had been a long time.

When Crispin touched my shoulder I almost jumped out from behind my
teeth. “No Lutch!” I said. I couldn’t help it.

“Hey,” said Crispin. “Level off, Fluke. So you noticed too?”

“Brother.”

“You wouldn’t think one man’s work would make that much difference,
would you?”

“I don’t get it,” I said. I meant that. “Johnny’s a hell of a guitar
player. Man, I think he’s _better_ than Skid.”

“He is,” Crispin said. “But—I think I know why Lutch doesn’t show when
he plays. Johnny plays terrific guitar. Skid plays terrific electric
guitar. Dig me? The two are played pretty much the same—and so are a
cello and a viola. But the attack is ’way different. Johnny exploits the
guitar as good as I’ve heard it anywhere so far. But Skid plays that
instrument out there.”

“What’s that to do with Lutch?”

“Think back, Fluke. When Skid came with us, he was amplified, period.
Look what he’s got now—and look where we are now. You know how much
we’ve depended on him.”

“I thought we were depending on his guitar.”

Crispin shook his big, straight-nosed head. “It’s Skid. I don’t think I
realized it myself until now.”

“Thanks,” I told him.

He looked at me curiously. “For what?”

I threw up my hands. “For—well, I feel better now, that’s all.”

“You’re a large charge of strange change, Fluke,” he said.

I said, “Everybody knows that.”

Three nights later I slugged Skid Portly from behind. I killed Lutch
Crawford with a pair of bolt-cutters. And there was Lutch—all of him,
all his music, all his jump, his public and his pride, in the palm of my
hand—three pinkish slugs with horn at one end and blood at the other. I
tossed ’em, caught ’em, put ’em in my pocket and walked off whistling
_Daboo Dabay_. It was the first time in eight years I had heard that
music and enjoyed it. Sometimes it takes a long time to kill a man.

Rehearsal next day was pretty dismal.

Crispin had everything set up. When we were all there, sort of milling
around, he got up on the lower tier of the stand. Everyone shut up,
except me, but then, I wasn’t laughing out loud.

Crispin’s mouth was tight. “I asked Fawn what to do,” he said abruptly,
“just like Lutch used to. She said, ‘What would Lutch do?’ I think Lutch
would first see if we could make it the way we are—find out how bad
we’re hurt. Right?”

Everybody uh-huhed. That’s what Lutch would do. Someone said, “How’s
Skid?”

Crispin barked, “You play trumpet. How’d you feel if someone sliced off
your lip?” Then he said, “I’m sorry, Riff.”

Riff said, “Gosh, that’s okay.”

They took their places. Fawn looked like the first week after Baton
Rouge. Giondonato started for the guitar. Crispin waved him back. “Stand
by, Johnny.” He glanced at the guitar. It was ready to go, resting neck
upward on the seat of Skid’s chair. Crispin touched it, straightened it
up a bit, lovingly. He bent and shifted the speaker outward a little.
Then he went to his luggage. “Theme,” he said. He looked over at me. I
picked up my mike, puffed into it, adjusted the gain.

Crispin gave a silent one-two. Fawn stroked a chord. The brasses swung
right: _Hoo_

And left: _Ha_

Fawn crowded the beat with her chord. I looked at her.

For the very first time she wasn’t looking at that spot on the floor in
front of the band. She was looking at Crispin.

_Hoo Ha_

Moff raised his clarinet, tongued it, laid his lips around the
mouthpiece, filliped the stops nervously, and then blew.

And with the first note of the clarinet, shockingly, came the full,
vibrato voice of Skid’s guitar: _Daboo, Dabay, Dabay, Daboo_ …

And right on top of it there was a thunderous, animal, coughing gasp,
and a great voice screaming, screaming, sobbing like peals of laughter.
The sound was huge, and crazy, and it dwindled to an echoing, “He isn’t
dead, he isn’t dead …”

And then I had to breathe, and I realized that the sounds had come from
me, that I was standing frozen, staring at Skid’s glittering guitar,
with the mike pressed close to my cheek. I began to cry. I couldn’t help
it. I threw down the microphone—it made a noise like thunder—and I took
the rolled-up handkerchief out of my pocket and hurled it at the guitar,
which was playing on and on and on, Lutch’s theme, the way Lutch wanted
it played, by somebody else. The handkerchief opened in the air. Two of
them hit the instrument and made it thrum. One stuck to the cloth and
went cometing under the chair.

Moff ran over there. I was screaming, “Use these, damn you!” Moff bent
as if to pick up something, drew back. “Crispin—it’s the—the fingers …”
and then he folded up and slumped down between the chairs.

Crispin made a noise almost like the first one I had blown into the
mike. Then he rushed me. He caught me by the front of the coat and the
belt and lifted me high in the air. I heard Fawn scream, _“Don!”_ and
then he threw me on the floor. I screamed louder than Fawn did.

I must have blacked out for a moment. When I opened my eyes I was lying
on the floor. My left arm had two elbows. I couldn’t feel it yet.
Crispin was standing over me, one foot on each side. He was shoving the
rest of them back. They were growling like dogs. Crispin looked a mile
high.

“Why did you do that to Skid?” Crispin asked. His voice was quiet; his
eyes were not. I said, “My arm …” and Crispin kicked me.

“Don! Don, let me—” and people began to jostle and push, and Fawn broke
through. She went to her knees beside me. “Hello, Fluke,” she said,
surprisingly.

I began to cry again. “The poor thing’s out of his mind,” she said.

“The poor thing?” roared Stormy. “Why, he—”

“Fluke, why did you do it?”

“He wouldn’t die,” I said.

“Who wouldn’t, Fluke? Skid?”

They made me sore. They were so dumb. “Lutch,” I said. “He wouldn’t be
dead.”

“What do you know about Lutch?” gritted Crispin.

“Leave him alone,” she blazed. “Go on, Fluke.”

“Lutch was living in Skid’s guitar,” I said patiently, “and I had to let
him out.”

Crispin swore. I really didn’t know he ever did that. My arm began to
hurt then. Fawn got up slowly. “Don …”

Crispin grunted. Fawn said, “Don, Lutch used to worry all the time about
Fluke. He always wanted Fluke to know he was wanted for himself. Fluke
had something that no one else had, but he wouldn’t believe it. He
always thought Lutch and the rest of us were sorry for him.”

The guitar was still playing. It rose in crescendo. I twitched. “Skid—”
I yelled.

“Moff, turn that thing off,” said Crispin. A second later the guitar
stopped. “I knew it would trap somebody,” he said to me, “but I never
thought it would be you. That’s a recording played through the guitar
amplifier. I made hundreds of ’em when I was running tests on Skid’s
guitar. I’ve been worried for a long time about the luck we’ve been
having—a choir missing this night, a side missing that night, a combo
out the next night. The more I thought of it the more it took a pattern.
Someone was doing it, and when that happened to Skid, I had an idea that
someone’d give himself away, if only for a second, when that guitar
began to play. I never expected _this!_”

“Leave him alone,” said Fawn tiredly. “He can’t understand you.” She was
crying.

Crispin turned to her. “What do you want to do with him? Kiss and make
up?”

“I want to kill him!” she shrieked back at him. She held out her
polished nails, crooked, like claws. “With these. Don’t you know that?”

Crispin stepped back, stunned.

“But that doesn’t matter,” she went on in a low voice. “We can’t stop
saying it now, of all times—What would Lutch want?”

It got very quiet in there.

“Do you know why he was rejected from the army during the war?” she
asked.

Nobody said anything.

Fawn said, “Extreme ugliness of face. That was a ground for deferment.
Look it up if you don’t believe me.” She shook her head slowly and
looked at me. “Lutch was always so careful of his feelings, and so were
we all. Lutch wanted him to have his face made over, but he didn’t know
how to suggest it to Fluke—Fluke was psychopathically sensitive about
it. Well, he waited too long, and I waited too long, and now look. I say
let’s have it done now, and save what little is left of the—creature.”

Stormy said, “This good-for-evil kick can go just so far.” The rest of
them growled.

Fawn raised her hands and let them fall. “What would Lutch do?”

“I killed Lutch,” I said.

“Shut up, you,” said Crispin. “All right, Fawn. But listen. After he
gets out of the hospital, I don’t care if he looks like Hedy Lamarr—he
stays out of my way or by God I’ll strap him down and take him apart
with a blunt nailfile.”

At long, long last I blacked out.

There was a time of lying still and watching the white, curve-edged
ceiling stream past, and a time of peeping through holes in the
bandages. I never said another word, and very little was said to me. The
world was full of strangers who knew what they were doing, and that was
okay with me.

They took the bandage off this morning and gave me a mirror. I didn’t
say anything. They went away. I looked myself over.

I’m no bargain. But by the Lord I can cite you hundreds of people now
who are uglier than I am. That’s a change from not knowing a single one.

So I killed Lutch Crawford?

Who was the downy-clown, the wise-eyes, the smarty-party, the gook with
a book and his jaws full of saws, who said, “The evil that men do lives
after them …”? He didn’t know Lutch Crawford. Lutch did good.

Look at the guy in the mirror. Lutch did that.

Lutch isn’t dead. I never killed anybody.

I told you and told you and told you that I want to make my own damn
way! I don’t want this face! And now that I have all this written down
I’m going out. You couldn’t make me a big guy too, could you, Lutch? I’m
going out through the top sash. I can get through. And then six floors,
face first.

Fawn—



THE DARK GODDESS



 … MORE TO A MARRIAGE …


AGNES VAN CREEFT moved noiselessly to the doorway and peered inside.
Jessie was lying quite still—no, not quite; her long nervous hands
palmed and stroked the blanket as if they could not get enough of the
touch of it. Jessie had lived every hour of her forty-odd years in this
same hungry, tactile way, and she would, to the end. There were few
enough hours left. The electric vitality of the woman was dimmed, but
definitely present in the room; a glowing rebellion, a refusal to
accept—not death; she seemed not to mind that—but dying.

The corners of Jessie’s deep-set eyes told her, apparently, that there
was more in the doorway than the bulk of drapes. Her head jerked to it,
swift as always.

Agnes was tall, large, with a soft face and a hard mouth. She came into
the room with small motions of silent feet. “Jessie?” she murmured.
“You’re awake?”

Jessie turned on her side and propped herself on one elbow. “Agnes!
Well, what do you know. Where’s Tommie? Come in, girl. Sit down. No,
here on the bed. Smoke? Oh, that’s right; you don’t smoke. Or drink.
Or—what was that other thing?” She grinned up puckishly.

“I suppose you mean dance,” said Agnes. She sat carefully on the edge of
the bed. “I sent Tommie on an errand. I wanted to talk to you.… Really,
Jessie, you should take better care of yourself—bouncing and shouting
like this.”

“What for?”

“You’re a very sick woman,” said Agnes. “I think you should have stayed
at the hospital.”

“What for?” Jessie said again. “I want to be here with my own things
while I—wait. You’re sitting between me and my ashtray.”

Agnes turned troubled eyes to the wide night-table. On it was a
black-enamelled, pedestalled figurine of softly gleaming bronze—a seated
nude, with the legs crossed above the knees, the shoulders tilted, the
arms raised, bent, holding the palms out to right and left, delicately.
The face, bland and secretive, pouting, would have been staring straight
into Agnes’s had the carven eyes been open. Agnes made a small grimace
and reached around the thing, being careful not to touch it, to get the
heavy smoking-set which lay beside it.

With the tray in her hand, Agnes checked herself. “Jessie, do you think
you really ought—”

“Give it here,” said Jessie, scooping it up and thumping it on the sheet
beside her. She thumbed out a cigarette and lit it, drawing quickly and
hard with her cheeks. The pulsing hollows and the surmounting double
arches of her deep eye-sockets stressed her emaciation, and Agnes felt
the familiar helplessness which had keyed her regard for this swift,
slender, wiry creature ever since they had met. “Jessie, smoking can’t
possibly—”

“Can’t possibly make me any worse than I am unless I set fire to my bed,
and I can’t do that while I’m chaperoned. Now, Aggie, what’s on your
mind?”

Agnes made her mouth even smaller. “Well, I—it’s a delicate sort of—I
mean, I don’t want to intrude, Jessie, Tommie’s a grown man and all
that, but he is my brother, and I have only his best—his best—and
there’s not very much, that is, very long …” She floundered to a stop.

Jessie regarded her quizzically. “ ’Sometimes I feel so _sorry_ for you,
Aggie. Great day, woman! Life gets so complicated even when a person
_tries_ to keep it simple! You know what you want to say, and yet you’re
all fouled up with your sensibilities. Keep it clean, kid. Let’s have
it.”

Agnes took an immaculate, preparatory handkerchief from her buttoned
sleeve. “I—hardly know how to begin.”

“I can see that,” said Jessie dryly. “Maybe I can help. The day after
tomorrow, or the day after that, I’ll be dead.”

Agnes winced. “Please, Jessie—”

“And you want me to do something before then. What is it?”

“You—you quite take my breath away, Jessie. But then, you always did. I
never could understand you.”

“I know. What do you want me to do?”

“You—you’re very hard to deal with, Jessie. You make it quite difficult
for me.”

“I’m very reasonable to deal with and I’m making it very easy. Now,
then … Come on, girl! You’re wasting time. You don’t want to waste time,
do you, Agnes?”

Agnes felt trapped—trapped into the very thing she had come here to do.
She was ten years older than Jessie, and yet Jessie had always been able
to rap her knuckles, to make her stand in the corner like a bewildered
child. “I want you to marry Tommie,” she blurted.

Jessie turned her head until she was looking straight upward from the
wide pillow. “Well, for Pete’s sake,” she breathed. Slowly she began to
smile. “What on earth for?”

“Oh, it would be so much better—can’t you see, dear? In every way; the
way Tommie would remember you, the way all his publishers and—and—”

“And his sister?”

“That has nothing—” Agnes faced those deep eyes; and for all their
smiling, for all their incorruptible clear-sightedness, there was no
mockery there. She finished, “Well, yes. For me too, of course.”

“Was this Tommie’s idea?”

“No.”

“His publishers ask you to come around?”

“No! How could they? Why should you ask a thing like that?”

“Those happened to be the people you mentioned. That leaves you. Why
should I do a thing like this for you?”

Agnes moved her lips but they made no words.

“Agnes, why fret about it at this late date? I am Mrs. Thomas Davis van
Creeft. That’s the way I’ve been getting my mail for twenty-two years.
I’m Tommie’s wife; even under the law it’s all nice and legal—now.”

And they both turned to look at the figurine—Jessie lovingly, Agnes
inadvertently. Then Agnes moved, on the edge of the bed, so that she
presented a large curved back to the object. “I know _that_ story,” she
said.

“No you don’t,” said Jessie, and shook her head. “You
couldn’t … anyway,” she added abruptly, “it doesn’t make any difference
now. We’re married—ask anyone.”

“Anyone won’t do,” said Agnes stonily. “Tommie told me about it years
ago.”

“I know he did.” She laughed, “Poor Tommie! Always defiant, and the
defiance was not good unless he could jolt somebody with it. Generally,
you.”

“Generally—me.”

The warmth crept back into Jessie’s voice. “It was one of the things—the
many, many things—he could depend on you for, Agnes. He shocked you, and
frightened you, and worried you, but you never stopped being devoted to
him, and he knew it. And you never tried to interfere once he had made
up his mind.”

For the first time since she had entered the room, Agnes smiled. It was
a surprisingly full smile, and was proper to the lines of her gentle
face. “It wouldn’t have made much difference,” she said.

Jessie laughed her sudden, barking laugh. “You’re so right. I don’t know
what makes you think he’d say a formal ‘I do’ after all these years.”

“He’d do it for you.”

“He would,” Jessie admitted, “and down inside he’d be thinking I’d
reneged on something, and was taking advantage of my strategic
position.” She waved a hand to include the room, the bed, and her
current situation.

Agnes was visibly shocked. “Jessie, I do wish you wouldn’t!”

“I don’t have the proper respect for the dying, I guess. Oh, Agnes, I’m
sorry, I’m very thoughtless.” A gleam came into her eyes. “But you see
how it feels to have me take advantage of my circumstances … Why bother
with this wedding thing now, of all times, Agnes? How could it possibly
matter?”

“Oh, I don’t know, I don’t know, I just wish it could be,” Agnes all but
sobbed. “I—do know, Jessie. M—maybe it’s because I’ve never married.
It’s just that—marriage is too big a thing to make a funny sophisticated
game out of. I know I’m old-fashioned, Jess, but I’ve always seen this
thing of yours as a sort of horrible mockery. You’ve been so—so—”

“Unrepentant?”

“Yes, and then there’s _that_ horrible thing,” and she gestured over her
shoulder with her now-moist handkerchief toward the statuette which
pouted at her broad back. “ ‘There’s our marriage-license,’ Tommie used
to say—that naked, pagan thing …”

“Shh. She’ll hear you.”

“I don’t—Oh, Jessie, _don’t_ play! I never could understand your kind of
joke—or your friends, or your ideas, or your way of life. And I’ve tried
_so_ hard not to interfere.”

Jessie caught her hand and squeezed it. “Agnes, don’t cry. You’re a
dear. You always were. I wish I knew a million like you; they don’t make
’em straighter. Sometimes I think things are simpler and cleaner for you
than they are for me, for all my bragging. You go by what’s laid down,
and I go by what seems best for all concerned. Sometimes I wish I was
like you.”

“If you were, you couldn’t make a charade out of a thing like marriage.
It’s too _big_ to be smeared by any one person, or by a couple, Jessie!
Marriage is the founda—”

“You don’t have to sell me that package,” said Jessie, her husky voice
crackling. Agnes stopped as if the other had thrown a switch.

“I bought it a long time back,” said Jessie, quietly. “I wrapped it up
and kept it shiny and clean for twenty-two years. Shut up,” she said,
without changing her inflection, as Agnes tried to speak. “Now I’m going
to talk. You just sit quiet and listen to me.”

She turned over on her back and put her hands behind her head. As she
spoke her eyes shifted from this point to that on the shadowed ceiling,
finding memories, some dim, some bright and clear, each reflecting its
corresponding amount of light into her face.

“Did you know I’d only known Tommie two weeks before we were—married?
That’s all it was. It doesn’t seem so long ago, yet people have been
born and grown up and married since then—people who are already older
than we were when we met …

“You remember the late ’twenties. Those were wild days. It was the last
gasp of Prohibition, and a lot of things went on that people tried not
to notice at the time and have since tried to forget. Road-house parties
were one of those things. The one we were on was big, and, like a lot of
’em, got smaller as we went along. We wanted to drink, that was all—not
because we liked the stuff, but because we were told we couldn’t. There
were plenty of places just north of New York, up through Connecticut and
Rhode Island, where anyone in a car could reach all the liquor and jazz
music he wanted, or thought he wanted. I suppose we knew it was stupid,
childish, and vicious, but we did it anyway, partly to rebel, partly to
be fashionable. Silly kids!

“I remember every detail of that evening. Tommie doesn’t. He’s like
that. That’s why he doesn’t drink now, hasn’t for years. When Tommie
drinks he doesn’t know what he’s doing at the time, doesn’t remember
afterward what he’s done, and feels rotten the next morning.

“Tommie had just sold a magazine story and was full of money and high
spirits. He wanted to buy me a present, but I didn’t feel that way about
Tommie—I thought if he gave me anything, something important might be
spoiled. He compromised on Miss O’Casey there—” she jabbed a finger
toward the statuette—“and bought it at one of those funny little antique
stores in Connecticut. We hauled her to one roadhouse after another,
setting her up on the tables and buying her drinks—you know.”

“We woke up next morning at my place. You could hardly call it a rosy
nuptial morning. Tommie felt terrible. The evening before was nothing to
him but a large black cloud with streaks of lightning through it; I
don’t think he wasted a minute trying to remember how he happened to be
in my bed when he woke up, or what, if anything, had happened between
us. He lay blinking dully at the dark goddess, which was sitting on my
vanity table looking very bland and peaceful, and he groaned because his
head hurt him. I fed him some breakfast and kissed him and sent him
home. I wasn’t too happy about the whole thing. I was crazy about
Tommie, and I didn’t want it spoiled, and I was afraid that now it was.

“He was back again in a couple of hours. Poor, mixed-up, mismanaged
Tommie! He didn’t know what to do, or where to turn. He’d arrived
home—he lived in a rooming-house uptown—to discover what little he had
piled up on the sidewalk. He just hadn’t gotten around to paying his
rent, and you know how it was with him in those days—forty dollars this
week, fifty dollars next, nothing for three weeks, a hundred the week
after. It was just after the stockmarket crash, and landladies were
getting very particular about that week’s rent in advance, and Tommie
simply didn’t have any money just then. That money he’d spent the night
before was all he had. He didn’t even have a bank account!”

“He could have come to me,” said Agnes stiffly.

“He’d’ve starved first,” said Jessie. “Not because he disliked you, or
even because of his pride, but just because he didn’t want to hear the
truth about himself that you were so ready to tell him. Let’s face it,
Agnes: Tommie didn’t become a big grown-up adult as fast as most of us.
He got there—but it took time.

“Well, I won’t go into too many details. First I let Tommie bring his
stuff over, because he had nowhere else to store it. I invited him to
dinner. When he came, he had a tragic story of hunting for some place to
hang his hat, and it just wasn’t possible without money. So—he stayed
over that night. And the next one. Finally I told him to stop wasting so
much time in house-hunting and make himself some money. The quickest way
for him to do that was to write, so he set up his old typewriter in a
corner of my living-room—I had a four-room place, and my roommate had
just left to get married—and he got to work.

“The first story bounced, and the second, and the third. The days ran
into weeks. I went to work every day, and Tommie would begin pounding on
the typewriter as I left. I’ll admit it—I loved every minute of it. I
guess I have a soft spot in me somewhere, and just don’t operate
completely unless there’s something I can take care of. Tommie kept a
little black book—I think he still has it somewhere—and carefully put
down every little thing that he ate and smoked and drank, and added half
the rent and gas and power, with a little over because he used the radio
while he was working. It was cute.

“It was wonderful, but it couldn’t go on forever. I got so I almost
dreaded the day he’d sell a story. I didn’t want him under my thumb,
but—just to have him there was—Well, finally, when he’d been with me
about six weeks, a check came in. When I got home he’d made dinner—oh,
Aggie, you should have seen it! Candles on the table, and he’d roasted
some squab. There was champagne! The idiot … the potatoes weren’t quite
done, and we had to gulp the shrimp-cup so the squab wouldn’t burn; but
it was the most wonderful dinner I ever had.” She flicked at her eyes
and laughed.

“And then he solemnly presented me with an envelope containing slips of
paper with columns of figures, and some money—down to the penny, his
share of the expenses while he’d been there. He was so proud of it! It
was the first time in his whole life he’d ever kept any kind of an
account. He sat me down on the settee and showed me every item, and on
some of them he quizzed me, with his face all puckered up with anxiety,
as to the price of apples or how much gas I thought it took to roast a
leg of lamb.

“I had to take the money. He’d’ve felt like a whipped pup if I hadn’t.
Then I said I guessed he’d be leaving me now. He shuffled his feet and
said, well, he guessed he should. I can’t tell you how I felt. Suddenly
it occurred to me to ask him, ‘Tommie! How much money have you got
left?’

“He admitted it, finally. He had three dollars and ninety cents. My
darling budget-master—three dollars and ninety cents!

“I think I laughed for half an hour. He thought—and probably still
thinks—that I was laughing because I thought he was funny. But I was
laughing because I knew I could make him stay. Finally he began to laugh
too, and he stayed.

“After that the question of his getting a place came up less and less
often. He still took care of the budget, bless him … you know, I think
that had a lot to do with his growing up in all the other ways? He began
keeping his income-tax straight, and thinking ahead about getting his
clothes pressed before he had to wear them, and keeping himself stocked
up with typewriter ribbons and stamps. There are some old friends who
say I made him over. Well, I didn’t. He did it all by himself.”

“But why didn’t you get married?”

Jessie smiled up into the place where the ceiling met the wall. “Tommie
was terrified of the idea. At the end of seven months, when he was back
on his feet and free to do what he wanted, we talked it out. He cared so
terribly much about the thing we had together, Agnes. Tommie’s a strange
man. Maybe that’s why his books are so popular.… I’d cut my tongue out
before I’d advise anyone else to do what we did. I don’t think it would
work for anyone else … anyway, Tommie was—and is—a sentimentalist of the
first water. If we went to a restaurant and had a really perfect meal—I
mean perfect in every last detail—Tommie wouldn’t go back. He’d made a
memory, and anything placed on it would mar it for him. He wanted to
keep that memory untarnished and unchanged in the little jewel-box he
kept in the back of his dear fuzzy head.

“ ‘We’re together because we want to be together,’ he would say. ‘The
very fact that we’re in this room together proves that there’s no place
in all the world where either of us want to be but here, together. We
don’t need a piece of paper to keep us together like two hot-dogs from
the butcher-store. If we had that piece of paper, we could never know if
we were together because we wanted to be, or if it was because society
made it the easiest thing to do.’ Sometimes he’d mention the jail. He’d
been walking along the street when a man right in front of him was
killed by gangsters, and he was held for four days as a witness—mostly
for his own protection; those were wild days. ‘That jail cell wasn’t
bad, Jess,’ he told me. ‘It wasn’t very big, but it was clean. The
fellow in there with me wasn’t bad company. They fed us regularly—not a
lot, but quite enough—and they let us smoke all we wanted to, and there
were magazines and candy-bars to be had at the commissary. The beds
weren’t innerspring, but they were clean, and it was warm enough at
night. I’ve been lots worse off than I was there. There was just one
thing about it—a thing that drove me half out of my mind while I was
there—a think that made that place a hell on earth. The door was locked.
_The door was locked!_ If they’d left it open—or even unlocked—I’d have
been willing to stay in there indefinitely. Marriage is like that, Jess.
We have ours, but the door is open. As long as we know it is, we never
have to go through it to see what’s on the other side. A marriage
license would lock it.’ ”

Jessie shifted restlessly. “Children would have locked it, too … and if
we could have had them, it would have been locked, and the whole story
would be different. But we couldn’t, worse luck—worse, worse luck …

“Anyway, as far as the world was concerned, we were married. That began
early, when I had to tell the landlady why I had a man in my place—I
blurted it out, and that was the end of it. Tommie was very upset about
that, but realized he could kick the whole story over with a word.
So—hardly anyone ever got to know. You wouldn’t have known if he hadn’t
been compelled to tell you.”

“I wish he hadn’t,” said Agnes. “I do. I’ve always liked you, Jessie.
Really I have, though I’ve never been able to understand you. But when
Tommie told me about your—your—about it, it blighted my whole attitude
toward both of you.”

“I know it did. I was always sorry about that. It was one of the more
infantile things that Tommie pulled, the darling. Anyway, we appointed
Miss O’Casey there—” she thumbed at the statue—“Official Keeper of the
Compact.” O.K.C., get it? Miss O’Casey. She was in on it from the
beginning. I told you Tommie’s a sentimentalist. Well, maybe I am too, a
little. He built a shelf in the little hallway between the living room
and the bedroom and put her up there, where she could see and be seen,
always. Tommie sometimes called her One-up, because of that raised
finger—one up for the common people. Sometimes I called her Gigglepuss,
just because her face is so placid and somber. But you say we made a
joke of it—it wasn’t a joke, Agnes. Never that. Miss O’Casey and what
she stood for was—is—a very serious thing indeed. Look at her, Aggie.
Please do. Look at her carefully.”

With an expression of martyred patience, Agnes turned to look at the
statue. She ran her eyes primly over the naked torso and bent to peer
into the face. “She does look—strong,” she confessed at length, “strong
and very peaceful.”

“She’s made that kind of marriage for us,” said Jessie quietly. “I can’t
describe to you the look that passes between Tommie and me when we hear
of some old friends getting a divorce—and there have been so many of
them, so terribly many! You know, they come to us, sometimes to one,
sometimes to both of us, and ask us how we’ve made it all these years.
They ask _us!_ And what can we tell them?” She shrugged. “Only to have
someone like Miss O’Casey here—and then keep faith with her. She does
her part.”

Agnes turned again to look at the statue. Behind her, Jessie, said,
almost sleepily, “There’s more to a marriage than a wedding, Agnes.”

“I—don’t think I ever realized that before, in just that way,” said
Agnes. She looked profoundly troubled. “I don’t see how you _did_ it!
Where was your security—how could you know he would always stay with
you? What guarantees—”

“The guarantees were between us; we had our faith and ourselves to
answer to, first and above all,” snapped Jessie. “And—there it is
again—as long as I had Miss O’Casey, I could be sure. I’m no
super-woman, Agnes. I did nothing that any other married woman hasn’t
done; I just played it a little differently, that’s all, because my man
was happier when I did. He’s been happy, Agnes.”

“Yes,” said Agnes, “he has.” She rose slowly. “I’ve been here too long,
Jess. I didn’t mean to tire you. I wish you could do as I asked, but I
can see now why you wouldn’t—why, at least according to your way of
thinking, you don’t have to. I can’t condone it; I’m sorry as I can be.
I wish I could feel easy in my mind about it, but I can’t. I’m sorry,
Jessie, more sorry than I can say.” She sighed, and rose slowly, feeling
her weight, her years.

“Aggie—”

“Yes, Jess.”

“Aggie—I can’t have you feeling this way, when it’s all so
simple … Aggie, for all Tommie told you—did we have a marriage?”

Agnes stood between the bed and the door, fighting something within
herself, a battle between two definitions of a word.

“Aside from the wedding, Agnes—_was it a marriage?_”

“I—I think it was,” Agnes whispered.

And then Jessie began to cry.

Agnes stared at her, completely bewildered. For years she had been
convinced that Jessie couldn’t cry. For many of those years she had been
certain that Jessie was so hard, so tough, she couldn’t be hurt,
couldn’t be reached.

“Jessie! What is it?”

“I’m—I’m _happy_, damn it. B-because of what you said. Here, get me Miss
O’Casey. Put her right down on the bed.”

Thunderstruck, quite beyond thought, Agnes lifted the statuette and put
it on the sheet. Jessie toppled it on its side.

“She’s Balinese,” she said. “The top part, the figure itself. Quite old.
The little man in the antique shop told us. But the pedestal is
American, Victorian. And—”

She put one hand on the elaborate head-dress of the dark goddess, and
the other under the base. There was a faint click, and then Jessie gave
the base a quarter turn to the right. It fell away.

“He showed us that, too, but Tommie didn’t remember. He didn’t remember
anything that happened that night. Here.”

From the depths of the statue, Jessie drew a folded square of paper and
extended it to the other.

Agnes absently found her spectacles and perched them on her nose. “What
is it?”

“Read it!”

_“This is to certify …”_ she read haltingly, “_before me this day
of … Jessica Mavis Tortelle and Thomas Davis van Creeft … holy
matrimony …_ Jessie! A license! A marriage license!” She fell down on
her knees by the bed. “Why didn’t you tell me? Why?”

Jessie tangled her fingers in the other’s obedient hair. “Honey,” she
said huskily, “You’d’ve blabbed to Tommie. It meant too much to you. You
couldn’t have helped yourself.”

“But—you mean Tommie doesn’t know, at all?”

“He does not. Look: I wanted to be married to Tommie. But he was so
scared of marriage he couldn’t see straight. If I’d told him this—” she
struck the license with her knuckle—“that first morning, he’d have been
ashamed of it. I won’t have anyone ashamed of any marriage of mine.
And—afterwards, you know, Agnes, Tommie’s a writer, but he’s no
bohemian. At heart, he’s a timid, clean-cut, conventional citizen.
Thinking he was living in sin has made him a gay dog, a little cut above
the rest of ’em. It’s done wonders for his work; his books are full of
tolerance for the way the other fellow lives, because he wants that
tolerance for himself.” She plunged the paper back into its hiding place
and deftly fitted the statuette together again. “Miss O’Casey is the
Official Keeper of the Compact, Agnes; and now she has a partner. You.
Guard it well.”

Agnes put the figure back on the night table, and her hands lingered on
the glossy back surface. “Jessie,” she said, “I’ll never understand
you.”

“Don’t try,” said Jessie, sinking back into the pillow. Her eyes closed.
Agnes stared down at her through her misted spectacles. Where had she
seen that expression of strength, and of peace? Oh, yes …

Suddenly Jessie’s eyes sprang open, and they blazed. “And if you ever
tell him,” she rapped, “so help me, Aggie, I’ll come back and haunt
you!”

“I won’t, dear; oh, I won’t!” and, impulsively, she did something she
never would have allowed herself to do ordinarily, for fear of a
bruising rebuff: she bent and kissed her sister-in-law. The thin arms
came up from the bed and went round her; Jessie hugged her, hard.

The funeral was short, and full of music and flowers—what Jessie would
have called “happy flowers, not sad flowers.” Drapes were drawn back to
let in the light, and the room was fragrant and warm and waiting for
laughter; none of your shadows and silences, wax and lilies for Jessie
van Creeft.

The coffin lay on a long, low trestle, covered with white silk, and, at
its foot, on a glass-topped table, stood the dark goddess. If the
attending priest regarded it as a pagan thing, then he had faith in the
power of his own doctrines, and said nothing against its presence.

After the words were spoken, Agnes stood for a long time looking at the
coffin and at the statue. Suddenly she stepped to the lowboy, and from a
vase took two or three rosebuds. She dropped them on the table before
the dark goddess, and left the room.

A man followed her. He was tall, timid, balding, gentle. “Agnes.”

“Yes, Tommie.”

“I saw you put the flowers there. I was—I … Why did you do it, Agnes?
Will you tell me?”

She looked at her gloves. “I just—thought Miss O’Casey deserved it,” she
said softly. “It was a real marriage.”

He put his arm around her. “Sis,” he whispered, “I didn’t know you knew
that.”

“I haven’t known it long,” she said into his lapel, “And oh, Tommie, I
wish I’d known before!”



SCARS


THERE IS A time when a thing in the mind is a heavy thing to carry, and
then it must be put down. But such is its nature that it cannot be set
on a rock or shouldered off on to the fork of a tree, like a heavy pack.
There is only one thing shaped to receive it, and that is another human
mind. There is only one time when it can be done, and that is in a
shared solitude. It cannot be done when a man is alone, and no man aloof
in a crowd ever does it.

Riding fence gives a man this special solitude until his throat is full
of it. It will come maybe two or three weeks out, with the days full of
heat and gnats and the thrum of wire under the stretcher, and the nights
full of stars and silence. Sometimes in those nights a chunk will fall
in the fire, or a wolf will howl, and just then a man might realize that
his partner is awake too, and that a thing in his mind is growing and
swelling and becoming heavy. If it gets to be heavy enough, it is put
down softly, like fine china, cushioned apart with thick strips of
quiet.

That is why a wise foreman pairs his fence riders carefully. A man will
tell things, sometimes, things grown into him like the calluses from his
wire cutters, things as much a part of him, say, as a notched ear or
bullet scars in his belly; and his hearer should be a man who will not
mention them after sun-up—perhaps not until his partner is dead—perhaps
never.

Kellet was a man who had calluses from wire cutters, and a notched ear,
and old bullet scars low down on his belly. He’s dead now. Powers never
asked to hear about the scars. Powers was a good fence man and a good
partner. They worked in silence, mostly, except for a grunt when a
post-hole was deep enough, or “Here,” when one of them handed over a
tool. When they pitched for the night, there was no saying “You get the
wood,” or “Make the coffee.” One or the other would just do it.
Afterward they sat and smoked, and sometimes they talked, and sometimes
they did not, and sometimes what they said was important to them, and
sometimes it was not.

Kellet told about the ear while he was cooking one evening. Squatting to
windward of the fire, he rolled the long-handled skillet deftly, found
himself looking at it like a man suddenly scanning the design of a ring
he has worn for years.

“Was in a fight one time,” he said.

Powers said, “woman.”

“Yup,” said Kellet. “Got real sweet on a dressmaker in Kelso when I was
a bucko like you. Used to eat there. Made good mulligan.”

They were eating, some ten minutes later, when he continued. “ ‘Long
comes this other feller, had grease on his hair. He shore smelt purty.”

“Mexican?”

“Easterner”

Powers’ silence was contributory rather than receptive at this point.

“She said to come right in. Spoons him out what should be my seconds o’
stew. Gets to gigglin’ an’ fussin’ over him.” He paused and chewed, and
when the nutritious obstacle was out of the way, spat vehemently.
“Reckon I cussed a little. Couldn’t he’p m’self. Next thing you know,
he’s a-tellin’ me what language not to use in front of a lady. We went
round and round together and that ended quick. See this ear?”

“Pulled a knife on you.”

Kellet shook his big, seamed head. “Nup. She hit me a lick with the
skillet. Tuk out part o’ my ear. After, it tuk me the better part of an
hour with tar soap to wash the last o’ that hair grease offen my
knuckles.”

One bullet made the holes in his stomach, Kellet told Powers laconically
while they were having a dip in a cold stream one afternoon.

“Carried a leetle pot-belly in them days,” said Kellet. “Bullet went in
one side and out t’other. I figgered fer a while they might’s well rack
me, stick me, bleed me, and smoke me fer fall. But I made it. Shore lost
that pot-belly in the gov’ment hospital though. They wouldn’t feed me
but custards and like that. My plumbin’ was all mixed up and
cross-connected.”

“Feller in th’ next bed died one night. They used t’wake us up ’fore
daylight with breakfast. He had prunes. I shore wanted them prunes. When
I see he don’t need ’em I ate ’em. Figgered nobody had to know.” He
chuckled.

Later, when they were dressed and mounted and following the fence, he
added, “They found the prune stones in m’bandages.”

But it was at night that Kellet told the other thing, the thing that
grew on like a callus and went deeper than bullet scars.

Powers had been talking, for a change. Women. “They always got a out,”
he complained. He put an elbow out of his sleeping bag and leaned on it.
Affecting a gravelly soprano, he said, “I’d like you better, George, if
you’d ack like a gentleman.”

He pulled in the elbow and lay down with an eloquent thump. “I know what
a gentleman is. It’s whatever in the world you cain’t be, not if you
sprouted wings and wore a hello. _I_ never seen one. I mean, I never
seen a man yet where _some_ woman, _some_ time, couldn’t tell him to ack
like he was one.”

The fire burned bright, and after a time it burned low. “I’m one,” said
Kellet.

Powers sensed that thing, that heavy growth of memory. He said nothing.
He was awake, and he knew that somehow Kellet knew it.

Kellet said, “Know the Pushmataha country? Nuh—you wouldn’t. Crick up
there called Kiamichi. Quit a outfit up Winding Stair way and was
driftin’. Come up over this little rise and was well down t’ord th’
crick when I see somethin’ flash in the water. It’s a woman in there. I
pulled up pronto. I was that startled. She was mother-nekkid.

“Up she goes on t’other side ’til she’s about knee-deep, an’ shakes back
her hair, and then she sees me. Makes a dive fer th’ bank, slips, I
reckon. Anyway, down she goes an’ lays still.

“I tell you, man, I felt real bad. I don’t like to cause a lady no
upset. I’d as soon wheeled back and fergot the whole thing. But what was
I goin’ to do—let her drown? Mebbe she was hurt.

“I hightailed right down there. Figured she’d ruther be alive an’
embarrassed than at peace an’ dead.

“She was hurt all right. Hit her head. Was a homestead downstream a
hundred yards. Picked her up—she didn’t weigh no more’n a buffalo
calf—an’ toted her down there. Yipped, but there wasn’t no one around.
Went in, found a bed, an’ put her on it. Left her, whistled up my
cayuse, an’ got to me saddlebags. When I got back she was bleedin’
pretty bad. Found a towel for under her head. Washed the cut with
whiskey. Four-five inches long under the edge of her hair. She had that
hair that’s black, but blue when the sun’s on it.”

He was quiet for a long time. Powers found his pipe, filled it, rose,
got a coal from the dying fire, lit up, and went back to his bedroll. He
said nothing.

When he was ready, Kellet said, “She was alive, but out cold. I didn’t
know what the hell to do. The bleedin’ stopped after a while, but I
didn’t know whether to rub her wrists or stand on m’ head. I ain’t no
doctor. Finally I just set there near her to wait. Mebbe she’d wake up,
mebbe somebuddy’d come. Mebbe I’d have my poke full o’ trouble if
somebuddy did come—I knowed that. But what was I goin’ to do—ride off?

“When it got dark two-three hours later I got up an’ lit a tallow-fat
lamp an’ a fire, an’ made some coffee. Used my own Arbuckle. ‘Bout got
it brewed, heard a funny kind of squeak from t’other room. She’s settin’
bolt upright lookin’ at me through the door, clutchin’ the blanket to
her so hard she like to push it through to t’other side, an’ makin’ her
eyes round’s a hitchin’ ring. Went to her an’ she squeaked ag’in an’
scrambled away off into the corner an’ tole’ me not to touch her.

“Said, ‘I won’t, ma’am. Yo’re hurt. You better take it easy.’

“ ‘Who are you?’ she says. ‘What you doin’ here?’ she says.

“I tol’ her my name, says, ‘Look, now, you’re bleedin’ ag’in. Just you
lie down, now, an’ let me fix it.’

“I don’t know as she trusted me or she got faint. Anyway down she went,
an’ I put a cold cloth on the cut. She says, ‘What happened?’

“Tole her, best I could. Up she comes ag’in. ‘I was bathin’!’ she says.
‘I didn’t have no—’ and she don’t get no further’n that, just squeaks
some more.

“I says, straight out, ‘Ma’am, you fell an’ hurt yo’re head. I don’t
recall a thing but that. I couldn’t do nought but what I did. Reckon it
was sort of my fault anyway. I don’t mean you no harm. Soon’s you git
some help I’ll leave. Where’s your menfolks?’

“That quieted her down. She tole me about herself. She was
home-steadin’. Had pre-emption rights an’ eighteen months left t’ finish
th’ term. Husband killed in a rock-slide. Swore to him she’d hold th’
land. Didn’t know what she’d do after, but spang shore she was a-goin’
to do that first. Lot o’ spunk.”

Kellet was quiet again. The loom of the moon took black from the sky and
gave it to the eastward ridge. Powers’ pipe gurgled suddenly.

“Neighbor fourteen mile downstream was burned out the winter before.
Feller eight mile ’tother way gone up to Winding Stair for a roundup,
taken his wife. Be gone another two months. This little gal sweat out
corn and peas for dryin’, had taters put by. Nobuddy ever come near,
almost. Hot day, she just naturally bathed in the crick.

“Asked her what about drifters like me, but mebbe gunmen. She reached
under the bed, drug out a derringer. Says, ‘This’s for sech trash.’ an’
a lettle pointy knife. ‘This’s for me,’ she says, just like that. I tol’
her to keep both of ’em by her. Was that sorry for her, liked her grit
so, I felt half sick with it.

“Was goin’ to turn in outside, by the shed. After we talked some an’ I
made her up some johnny-cake, she said I c’d bunk in th’ kitchen if I
wanted. Tol’ her to lock her door. She locked it. Big wooden bar. I put
down m’roll an’ turned in.”

The moon was a bead on the hill’s haloed brow; a coronet, then a crown.

Powers put his pipe away.

“In the mornin’,” said Kellet, “she couldn’t get up. I just naturally
kicked the door down when she wouldn’t answer. Had a bad fever. Fast
asleep an’ couldn’t wake up but for a half minute, an’ then she’d slide
off ag’in. Set by her ’most all day, ’cept where I saw to my hoss an’
fixed some vittles. Did for her like you would for a kid. Kept washin’
her face with cold water. Never done nothin’ like that before; didn’t
know much what to do, done the best I could.

“Afternoon, she talked for a hour or so, real wild. Mostly to her man,
like he was settin’ there ’stead o’ me. He was a lucky feller. She
said …

“Be damned to you what she said. But I … tuk to answerin’ her oncet in a
while, just ‘Yes, honey,’ when she got to callin’ hard for him. Man a
full year dead, I don’t think she really believed it, not all the way
down. She said things to him like—like no woman ever thought to say to
me. Anyway … when I answered thataway she’d talk quiet. If I didn’t
she’d just call and call, and git all roiled up, an’ her head would
bleed, so what else you expect me to do?

“Next day she was better, but weak’s a starveling colt in a blowin’
drought. Slept a lot. I found out where she’d been jerkin’ venison, an’
finished it up. Got some weeds outen her black-eye peas. Went back ever’
now an’ then to see she’s all right. Remember some red haw back over the
ridge, rode over there and gathered some, fixed ’em to sun so’s she’d
have ’em for dried-apple pie come winter.

“Four-five days went by like that. Got a deer one day, skinned it an’
jerked it. Done some carpenterin’ in th’ shed an’ in th’ house. Done
what I could. Time I was fixin’ the door to the kitchen I’d kicked down
that first mornin’, she lay a-watchin’ me an’ when I was done, she said
I was good. ‘Yo’re good, Kellet,’ she said. Don’t sound like much to
tell it. Was a whole lot.”

Powers watched the moon rise and balance itself on the ridge, ready to
float free. A single dead tree on the summit stood against it like a
black-gloved hand held to a golden face.

Kellet said, “Just looka that ol’ tree, so … strong-lookin’ an’ … so
dead.”

When the moon was adrift, Kellet said, “Fixed that door with a new beam
an’ good gudgeons. Man go to kick it down now’d have a job to do. She—”

Powers waited.

“—she never did use it. After she got well enough to get up an’ around a
bit, even. Just left it open. Mebbe she never thought about it. Mebbe
she did, too. Nights, I’d stretch out in my bedroll, lay there, and
wait. Pretty soon she’d call out, ‘Good night, Kellet. Sleep good, now.’
Thing like that, that’s worth a passel o’ farmin’ an’ carpenterin’ …

“One night, ten-’leven days after I got there, woke up. She was cryin’
there in the dark in t’other room. I called out what’s the matter. She
didn’t say. Just kept a-bawlin’. Figgered mebbe her head hurt her. Got
up, went to th’ door. Asked her if she’s all right. She just keeps
a-cryin’—not loud, mind, but cryin’ hard. Thing like that makes a man
feel all tore up.

“Went on in. Called her name. She patted the side o’ the’ bed. I set
down. Put my hand on her face to see if she was gettin’ the fever ag’in.
Face was cool. Wet, too. She tuk my hand in her two an’ held it hard up
ag’in her mouth. I didn’t know she was so strong.

“Set there quiet for two-three minutes. Got m’hand loose. Says, ‘What
you bawlin’ for, ma’am?’

“She says, ‘It’s good to have you here.’

“I stood up, says, ‘You git back to yo’re rest now, ma’am.’ She—”

There were minutes between the words, but no change in his voice when he
continued.

“—cried mebbe a hour. Stopped sudden, and altogether. Mebbe I slept
after that, mebbe I didn’t. Don’t rightly recall.

“Next mornin’ she’s up bright an’ early, fixin’ chow. First time she
done it since she’s hurt. Tole her, ‘Whoa. Take it easy, ma’am. You
don’t want to tucker yo’reself out.’

“She says, ‘I coulda done this three days ago.’ Sounded mad. Don’t
rightly know who she’s mad at. Fixed a powerful good breakfast.

“That day seemed the same, but it was ’way differ’nt. Other days we
mostly didn’t talk nothin’ but business—caterpillars in th’ tomato
vines, fix a hole in the smoke shed, an’ like that. This day we talked
the same things. Difference was, we had to try hard to keep the talk
where it was. An’ one more thing—didn’t neither of us say one more word
’bout any work that might have to be done—tomorrow.

“Midday, I gathered up what was mine, an’ packed my saddlebags. Brought
my hoss up to th’ shed an’ watered him an’ saddled him. Didn’t see her
much, but knowed she’s watchin’ me from inside th’ house.

“All done, went to pat m’hoss once on the neck. Hit him so hard he
shied. Right surprised m’self.

“She come out then. She stood a-lookin’ at me. Says, ‘Good-bye, Kellet.
God bless you.’

“Says good-bye to her. Then didn’t neither of us move for a minute. She
says, ‘You think I’m a bad woman.’

“Says, ‘No sech a damn thing, ma’am! You was a sick one, an’ powerful
lonesome. You’ll be all right now.’

“She says, ‘I’m all right. I’ll be all right long as I live,’ she says,
‘thanks to you, Kellet. Kellet,’ she says, ‘you had to think for both of
us an’ you did. Yo’re a gentleman, Kellet,’ she says.

“Mounted, then, an’ rode off. On the rise, looked back, saw her still by
the shed, lookin’ at me. Waved m’hat. Rode on.”

The night was a white night now, since the moon had shucked its buoyant
gold for its traveling silver. Powers heard Kellet turn over, and knew
he could speak now if he cared to. Somewhere a mouse screamed briefly
under an owl’s silent talons. Distantly, a coyote’s hungry call built
itself into the echoing loneliness.

Powers said, “So that’s what a gentleman is. A man that c’n think for
two people when the time comes for it?”

“Naw-w,” drawled Kellet scornfully. “That’s just what she come to
believe because I never touched her.”

Powers asked it, straight, “Why didn’t you?”

A man will tell things, sometimes, things grown into him like the
calluses from his wire-cutters, things as much a part of him as, say, a
notched ear or bullet scars in his belly; and his hearer should be a man
who will not mention them after sun-up—perhaps not until his partner is
dead—perhaps never.

Kellet said, “I cain’t.”



MESSENGER


THE TWO GUNS spoiled the lines of Bentow’s carefully fitted coat. No one
but he and his tailor would have noticed it, but he would be happy when
he had used them and had done with the whole business.

He stepped out of the administrative corridor into the south end of
Generator Room No. 5, and glanced down its enormous length. The great
dynamos crouched off into distance like an avenue of hulking houses. A
slight movement in the gleaming street between them made Bentow step
back into the corridor.

After an interminable wait old Zeitz, the section night watchman,
trudged by, his eyes cast down, his ancient legs transmuting these
indoor distances into his rounds just as mechanically as the purring
monsters about him turned motion into power.

When he had gone, Bentow put his sleek head out of the corridor again,
and then stepped into the room. Staying close to the aluminum-clad wall,
he walked quickly to the end of the room and along it to the open
doorway of Condenser Station No. 48, where his inspection route charts
had shown him that Auckland Ford should be.

Ford, straight and gray, was there standing with his level eyes on the
instrument panel inside. He turned in surprise as Bentow stepped inside.

“Well,” he said, smiling. “You’re about the last person I ever expected
to see where the work gets done.”

Bentow forced himself to return the smile. “Public relations isn’t all
cocktails and stuffed shirts, Mr. Ford,” he said. “I worked right
through midnight tonight, and since I was at the plant, I thought I’d
bone up a little on how things work. You’d be surprised how many
technical questions are asked at those cocktail parties.”

“So this is research? Well, I’m glad to help. This is the first thing
you’ve done that I can like, Bentow.”

“You really do dislike me, don’t you?” Bentow said, frowning.

“I didn’t say that,” said Ford. “I just don’t give a hang one way or the
other. Hope I’m not being too frank.”

“Not at all,” said Bentow stiffly. He wet his lips. “Your daughter
appears to have a certain amount of respect for me.”

“That isn’t respect,” said Ford bluntly. “She’s too young to know what
respect is. She can understand authority and she knows who brings the
feed pan. But if she wants to marry you, it’s all right with me. You’re
not a bad catch. You’ve got a good income, a really impressive array of
false front, and plenty of good looks. Dorcas is a sweet kid, but I
faced the fact long ago that she’s not too bright.”

“She is everything in the world I want,” said Bentow solemnly.

“Good,” said Ford. “And, by Heaven, I expect you to behave accordingly,
or you’ll answer to me!”

Overhead a horn honked—a series of five unpleasant _beeps_.

“That’s my call,” said Ford. “Early. My report’s not due for another ten
minutes. Just a second, Bentow.”

He stalked out the low doorway and took down the phone which hung
outside. Bentow shuffled his feet nervously and then moved to the far
bulkhead, where he would be out of sight of the generator room. Ford was
back in a moment.

“Just a reminder that the manifold in eighty-seven needs a special
inspection,” he said.

“Did you tell them I was here?” Bentow asked.

“I did not. It wasn’t a social call.”

“But you’ll make your routine report ten minutes from now?”

“Of course.”

“Just wondered,” said Bentow, and thought to himself, “I’d better wait
until after he reports. Killing ten minutes will give me a little
practice. Do my killing by stages—”

“Well, what did you want to know?” asked Ford.

“Oh—I know pretty much the general principles,” said Bentow. “A
mercury-vapor power plant using the atomic-pile heat from the
transmutation factory. But tell me about these condenser stations, just
as if I were some curious bubblehead at a cocktail party.”

Ford gave him a somewhat pitying look, and finally said, “All right, Mr.
Curious Bubblehead from a cocktail party.” He grinned while Bentow
winced. “These stations are not the condensers themselves; those are all
underneath. But the mercury lines pass through here—high-pressure ones
to the turbines, low-pressure ones to the exhaust chambers of the
condensers. These stations check the pressures on each, all the time.”

“What exactly for?” Bentow queried.

“Well, the pressure data are matched with generator output to determine
the working efficiency; with mercury-flow checks to determine the
volatilization rate—that has everything to do with the chemical purity
of the mercury—and, most of all, to check for leaks.”

“Yes. I know that’s important. The stuff is quick poison at those
pressures.”

“Mercury vapor is poison at any pressure,” said Ford. “But at these
pressures—” he pointed to the great trunks of the ducts which led
through the back wall and down into the floor—“750 pounds per square
inch to the turbines, and a mere 60 pounds for exhaust, the vapor can
reach a lethal concentration like _that!_” and he snapped his long
fingers. “The tiniest pin hole in one of those trunks over there would
mean a deadly concentration of vapor here in seconds!”

“And how long would it take to kill a man?” Bentow asked curiously.

“Only a few minutes.”

“But any of you operators can smell the stuff before it gets dangerous,
can’t you?”

“No. A concentration of only one part in one hundred thousand in air is
dangerous. A man would be seriously poisoned by the time he felt
anything at all,” said Ford.

Bentow thought this over for a moment before asking, “Well, what
protects you?”

Ford pointed to a small box, screened, on a shelf. Blue-white light
hovered around it. “Ikey does,” he said.

“Oh, yes—the spectral detector. Just how does it work?”

“Well, you know how dark lines show up on a spectroscope?”

“I think so,” said Bentow. “If you put a sheet of cadmium-tinted glass
over your spectroscope and shoot the sun, you’ll get dark lines on the
cadmium sector of the solar spectrum.”

“That’s roughly the idea. Well, Ikey there has a photo-electric cell
with a mercury filter over it. Trained on it is a mercury-vapor lamp. If
any trace of mercury vapor occurs in the air in here, the value of the
light that reaches the cell changes because of the spectral lines which
occur behind the filter. Then Ikey goes into action.”

Bentow looked at his elaborate wrist watch. He knew all this, but it
didn’t hurt to check again while he waited.

“Well, first of all he sets up a yell,” Ford continued. “There are
screechers all around the plant; if you’ve ever heard one once you’ll
never forget it. Then he automatically shuts the door to this station
and starts blowers to change the air.”

“Shuts the door? But suppose someone is in here?”

“There’s a push-button outside the door, but the phone.”

“Oh yes,” said Bentow. “I noticed it. It has a light over it.”

“That’s right. Well, when I come in here I push it. The light lights,
and if anything should happen in here the door will stay open until I
can get out and push the button. If I should be hurt, someone else will
be along but quick, fish me out, and close the door. But if no one is
here, the door will close as soon as the alarm starts.”

“Ah,” said Bentow. “And suppose you forget to push the button when you
first come in?”

“You _don’t_ forget,” said Ford grimly.

The overhead horn sounded a series of five beeps again.

“My report,” said Ford.

“Don’t mention that I’m here,” said Bentow swiftly. “This is a little
irregular, you know.”

“More irregular for me than for you,” said Ford. “I’m working. Don’t
worry, I won’t.” He went out.

Bentow shifted the guns in his side pockets tensely, and leaned back
against the bulkhead. “I’m working,” he muttered under his breath.

Why should Auckland Ford work? he wondered. The man was brilliant; had
been ever since his youth, when, as the winner of a talent search, he
had done that phenomenal job on heat-transfer devices. A lot of that
work was built into this very plant—the slow viscous flow of Fordium, as
it was called, from the pile jackets to the mercury boilers was Ford’s
development. The heavy stuff was incredibly stable, and absorbed little
radiation from the hellish fury of the piles. It transferred plenty of
heat and a negligible amount of radiation to the boilers.

Ford was a wealthy man—one of the wealthiest in this part of the world.
But what did he do with his money? Gave it away, a lot of it. The rest
moldered in banks, awaiting yet another of his fantastically generous
impulses. The charity called Providence had benefited, no one knew how
much, from Ford’s gifts.

Providence, with its subsidies of pure science, or applied science in
any field which furthered the humanities—such as a lie-detector which
was now accepted by the courts; nine specialized cancer cures, a
bombardment technique which preserved food in cellophane jackets without
refrigeration, and so on and on.

And now, according to the word that Ford’s pretty but slightly stupid
daughter had dropped, Ford was going to will everything he owned to
Providence, as soon as Julius, his attorney, returned from the coast,
which would be this week. And what did he, Bentow, want with that
empty-headed doll without her enormous inheritance?

Bentow glanced around the bare room. There were the two huge mercury
trunks. There was Ikey, the detector, who would start to yell when one
part of mercury vapor in two billion of air showed itself. He would like
very much to impair Ikey’s efficiency, but did not dare. Ikey would be
one of the first things inspected after the “accident.”

Aside from the pressure indicators, there was very little else in the
room, except a spanner or two and a small first-aid kit. Bentow nodded
in satisfaction.

Ford came in, his long gray eyes going immediately to the gauges.
Apparently satisfied, he turned to Bentow.

“Anything else you wanted to know?” he asked.

“Only one thing I wanted to be sure of. If there’s a leak and the doors
close, how long do they stay closed?”

“Twelve hours, as a matter of safety. The boiler lines are diverted as
soon as three others can be slowed down and this boiler’s output
diverted to them.”

“During that time, you say the blowers will be replacing the air in
here,” Bentow said. “Does the alarm keep on sounding until the
concentration is down below one part in two billion?”

“Gosh, no!” grinned Ford. “We’d be out of our minds if it did. No—as
soon as the door closes, the alarm is shut off, except for light signals
which indicate which station has the trouble. Unless, of course, the
concentration continues to rise. Then Ikey sounds off again.”

“I see,” said Bentow, who had known it before, but was glad of the final
check. “One more thing—and this is just personal curiosity; don’t answer
me unless you want to. But why do you work here?”

Ford smiled, and his cool gaze pinioned Bentow. “I wouldn’t really
expect you to understand,” he said quietly. “It’s just that I found out
very early that there is nothing that can destroy a human being but
excess. Alcohol won’t hurt you, drunkenness will. Work won’t hurt you,
exhaustion will. And so on through everything a man eats, thinks,
drinks, and breathes.

“And there is such a thing as too much success and too much money,” he
went on. “You don’t believe that, I know. I’ve worked all my life. I
don’t live a Spartan existence—that’s an extreme—but I haven’t let
myself get soft. My company pension comes due soon, and it’ll be enough.
I’m getting rid of everything else. I don’t need it. I have my home and
my lab and a lot of things to interest me. That’s all I want. But there
are thousands of other people who want and need my surplus money; they
can have it. It’ll do them good and it could only harm me—like any
excess.”

“It really is true, then, that you’re turning over everything you have
to Providence?” Bentow questioned.

“That’s right. Did Dorcas tell you?”

“Yes. But why Providence?”

Ford laughed. “I don’t know why I tell you this. No one else knows.
Providence is mine. I founded it.”

Bentow’s eyes popped, and Ford laughed again.

“But that must have taken millions!” Bentow gasped.

“I just had some good ideas.” Ford’s eyes speared into Bentow. “I know
what you’re thinking. That money meant so much rich living, so much
yachting, so much social climbing—not for me, Bentow. I’m a working
man.”

Bentow’s eyes glowed strangely. “I think you’re crazy.”

Ford shrugged. “You would. You have never learned the meaning of
‘enough.’ ”

“Does Dorcas feel the same way you do?”

“She doesn’t feel,” said Auckland Ford positively. “Easy come, easy
go—she’s always been a happy, or slap-happy, child. Maybe some day
she’ll get a jolt big enough to give her some sense. I don’t believe in
jolting people who are close to me, personally. It’s useless to talk
sense to your intimates. They’ll only listen to strangers.” He shrugged.
“Dorcas is _good_,” he said. “Sooner or later, that will show up.”

Bentow took the gun from his left jacket pocket. A corner of his mind
appreciated the fact that his jacket now fell to its correct cut.

Ford said, in surprise, “That’s mine!”

“Dorcas took me on an extensive tour of your laboratory,” said Bentow.
“These long evenings at home, when you’re on the night shift—”

“That gun will never be good for anything,” said Ford. “Not as a weapon,
anyway. Industrially it might have some use—if anyone wants a tool that
will penetrate fifty inches of molyb steel with a hole a thousandth of
an inch in diameter.”

“What about this one?” Bentow drew the other, and the sartorial corner
of his mind heaved a satisfied sigh.

“I don’t deal in weapons,” said Ford. “Can’t say I’m crazy about the
idea of your just picking these up.”

“No one knows I’ve got them—not even Dorcas,” said Bentow. “This one,”
he added persistently. “A paralysis device, isn’t it?”

“That’s what it turned out to be,” said Ford glumly. I was fooling with
subsonics for anaesthetic purposes. I suppose you know the police now
carry that one as standard equipment. Causes a temporary derangement of
the motor centers. What the deuce are you doing with it?”

Bentow smiled. “Only this,” he said, and pressed the thumb-stud.

Ford stood stiffly, almost as he always stood. But now his mouth opened
slowly, his tongue protruded and began to oscillate violently. His long,
narrow eyes widened until they were almost perfectly round. His hands
curled, tensed, straightened, stiffened. He overbalanced slowly, like a
tall tree just sawed through, fell to lean stiffly a moment against the
bulkhead, and then jackknifed to the floor.

“I know you can hear me,” said Bentow smugly, putting away the paralysis
gun. “You just can’t move. Don’t worry, that will only last two or three
minutes. I wish I could be here to see what the great Brain will do
then. The place will be full of mercury vapor, and that so carefully
designed hermetically sealed door will be closed. Pound against it all
you wish—no one will hear you. The phone’s outside, the door controls
are outside, and no one will know you’re here.”

He paused, cocking his shining head to one side as if listening.

“Oh,” he said, pretending the other had spoken. “You want to know why?
Well, Mr. Brilliant Scientist, it seems that you are about to leave all
of your considerable fortune to a thing called Providence, with the
bland idea that I shall be able to support your dear daughter on my
wages in the manner to which she has become accustomed. My dear Mr.
Ford, I intend to do much better than that—with the money which she will
now inherit!”

He still held the other gun. He walked over the trunk duct marked “HP”
for “High Pressure” and fired twice. There was no sound—simply a line of
blue light so fine it was almost invisible.

“Those,” he said, putting the gun in his pocket, “will be attributed to
pressure leakage. Because you were afraid that this thing would be used
as a weapon, you have kept its performance characteristics secret, and I
assure you that all of your records will be destroyed before I go on my
honeymoon.

“I must go now.” An ugly smirk was on his face. “I am sincerely sorry
that I cannot stay to see what you do when you come out of the
paralysis. I would, but I can’t think of jeopardizing the health of your
future, if post-mortem, son-in-law.”

He waved his hand jauntily and stepped into the generator room. He
called back, “What amuses me most in this dramatic situation is that you
are being killed by two of your own inventions, in a plant which is
possible because of a third. A happy suicide to you!”

He stood tensely by the doorway. Turning, he pushed the button there.
The light went out. Then he sprinted to the corner and down the
generator room to the administrative corridor.

There he waited until there came a harrowing mechanical scream which
went on and on and on. A red light flared over the door of the station
he had just left, and its ponderous door slid shut with a clang. Through
the clamor of the screecher he could hear the pound of running feet. He
turned and sprinted up the corridor to his office. The light still
burned there.

He opened the closet and took out his overcoat. With one arm into it, he
went to the door which gave on to the general offices and opened it a
crack. There were voices outside.

“A leak,” someone said out there. It was old Zeitz, the night watchman.
“Stay right here, Sam. There was a blowoff out Hancord oncet where they
phonied up an alarm to get the guards outen the offices, so’s they could
steal secret files. You stay right here till I git back, and’ grab
anyone thet come in, no matter who.”

“I got you,” said a bass voice.

Peering around the door, Bentow could see the shadowy hulk of the
younger guard, and knew immediately that his, Bentow’s, kind of brains
would be useless against that particular one hundred and ninety pounds.

Bentow shucked out of his coat and put it away. He was not going to go
out into the generator room, with guards and techs converging on
Condenser Station No. 48, and he couldn’t leave while that big guard was
out there. His office was soundproof; he would simply pretend to be
working late until all of the excitement died away, or express profound
regret about the whole thing if someone came in accidentally.

Not that anyone would. In a technological emergency, no one would dream
of calling the public relations office, even during office hours.

He settled back into his swivel chair, and smiled.

A half an hour later he screamed when Auckland Ford tottered into his
office.

Ford, with his long face flushed and his once-clear eyes shot with
blood, smiled a ghastly smile. Bentow screamed again, tried to huddle
away, upset his swivel chair and cowered in a sobbing heap in the
corner.

Men poured in, to catch Ford as he fell, to snatch the sodden Bentow to
his feet and hold him.

From a deep easy-chair, with solicitous technicians around him, Ford
glared redly at Bentow. “Well, Bentow, did you hear it?” he said.

“Hear what?” quavered Bentow.

Jackson, the swarthy plant super, said, “He means the screecher, when it
gave his code call.”

“This office is soundproof,” said Bentow. “I don’t know what you’re
talking about.”

Ford’s breath took on a wheeze. Jackson said, “I’ll tell you, Bentow.
Ford doesn’t want to go to the hospital until he knows you’ve been told
what happened. Can’t say I blame him.” His lips curled. He went on, “He
found himself locked in that cell with the vapor concentration mounting.
He’d been knocked down by a paralyzer but—” awe entered his voice—“that
didn’t keep his brain from working. When he could move again he found
himself in a real spot.”

“I’d have written your name on the floor,” rasped Ford at Bentow, “but I
didn’t have anything to write with. Not even a spanner would make an
impression on the stuff.”

“You rest easy,” said a guard, with his hand on Ford’s shoulder.

“Yeah, I’ll tell it,” said Jackson. He turned back to the sweating
Bentow. “He tried to write on the floor, first of all, and lost minutes
at it. When I _think_ of it!” he exploded. “All of us milling around
outside, and the door closed, and none of us dreaming that there might
be anyone inside! The screecher giving the alarm, and then dying out and
all of us nodding at each other and saying, ‘Well, we’ll get to her at
noon tomorrow.’ And all the while he—”

He thumbed over his shoulder at Ford, who grinned weakly.

“The medicine chest,” Ford whispered. “Only thing there was in the
place.” He laughed horribly. “I took a—” He began to cough.

Jackson said again, “I’ll tell it. We were about to go back to our
stations when the screecher started up again. That meant only that the
leak was getting ahead of the blowers, at first. But none of us had ever
heard the screecher like that. Hinks here spotted it.”

Hinks, the guard, nodded and, oddly, blushed. “It went _Awk.
Awk-awk-awk. Awk_.”

His imitation of the alarm screecher was so startlingly accurate that
every man in the room jumped. Hinks blushed again and tittered, pulled
himself together and said:

“It done it again, and a third time, and all of a sudden I remembered
that was Mr. Ford’s code-call on the beeper.”

“Very—” said Bentow, and then his voice failed him. He swallowed hard
and tried again. “Very ingenious. What has that to do with me?”

“It was Ikey,” said Ford from his chair. “Ikey’s like a light meter.
Hold one candle one foot away, the meter’ll say one foot-candle. Hold
twenty candles twenty feet away, it’ll still say one foot-candle.” He
ran out of breath.

“Yeah,” said Jackson, “all Ikey knows is the concentration of mercury
vapor in that little air space between the light and the cell. Mr. Ford
took a thermometer—why they put a fever thermometer in all these local
first aid kits I’ll never know, but they’re standard—and he broke it and
held a little pool of mercury smaller’n a dime under the beam of Ikey’s
light.”

“Shielded it off with a piece of my shirt,” whispered Ford. “As
primitive as Indian smoke signals. The little bit of mercury that
vaporizes at room temperature drove Ikey into hysterics when it was that
close to the beam.”

“I still don’t see what this has to do with me,” said Bentow.

“You will,” snapped Jackson. “Mr. Ford told us what you said about
killing him with his own inventions. Watch what happens to you when you
run into the lie-detector in court. He invented _that_, too!”

The door from the general offices opened. The guard-captain stood
flat-footed and looked at every face in the room in one swift sweep.
Then he pointed his finger at Bentow.

“His,” he said tersely.

“I asked the captain to get the thumb-print from that push-button
outside Station Number 48,” Jackson explained, “and match it if he could
in the company files. It’s yours all right.”

Bentow opened his mouth, put his hands to his face, and slumped down in
a near faint.

“I think,” said Ford harshly, “that my haywire kid Dorcas is going to
get that jolt I was talking about.” Then, oddly, he began to laugh. He
laughed until Hinks nudged him anxiously.

“I’m all right,” whispered Ford. “Maybe I’m delirious. I was just
thinking about getting that message through to you fellows. Did you know
I’m leaving everything to Providence?”

There was a bumble of approving excitement in the room.

“Providence,” said Ford, “has had a lot of names at one time or
another—a lot of ’em. D’you remember what the name of Jupiter’s
messenger was, Jackson?”

Jackson frowned.

“Uh—Hermes?”

“No, son. It was Mercury!”

Ford shook his head and laughed again.



MINORITY REPORT


This is the strange story of Dr. Falu Englehart’s change of heart and
the truth of how he turned from a dedicated lifetime to tear down his
dream. It can be told now because, in the matter of the Titan invasion,
humanity has shown itself, en masse, to have come of age—to have reached
a stage of understanding.

For we in this twenty-eighth century are a strange race, only now
entered upon our Third Phase, the first being an age of faith—and
ignorant superstition—and the third of understanding and tolerance. The
years between are a hell and a horror—the accursed five centuries which
began in the eighteenth century, and which ended in near suicide in the
twenty-second—years in which faith was destroyed and understanding not
yet achieved.

It can be told now because it cannot hurt us. Had the story been
circulated in the mad years of the Second Phase, it would have dealt a
blow to humanity’s belief in itself from which it might never have
recovered. Humans knew what they were, even then; but during that
violent adolescence they went to insane lengths to prove that they were
otherwise—that they were supreme.

When the Titans descended upon us fifty years ago and dealt their
insignificant portion of death and ruin, we answered as an understanding
people would. We recognized in them our counterparts, a race in the
throes of the disease called conquest. We are a peaceful species, close
to the land; and they did not understand that our farms and our
city-less planet represented, not a primitive society, but a society
fulfilled. They took our achievement for a stasis or a recidivism, our
decentralization as a sign of the primitive. When we immobilized them
without machines—and like all very young humanoids, they worshipped
machines—and defended ourselves by the simple expedient of teaching them
their own terrible acquisitive history, why, we did not dam their stream
and drive it back, like sweating savages; we dried it up. So much for
that well-known tale; it does, however, demonstrate one of the ways in
which we have proven our maturity, and our fitness to hear the strange
story of Dr. Englehart.

Falu Englehart was born, to quote Umber’s epic poem on his life, “with
stars in eyes that were myopic to all earthly things.” At nine he built
his first telescope, and at twelve he developed a new technique for
cataloguing novae.

He lived in the uneasy peace of the twenty-first century, when the world
was an armed mechanical thing which seized upon a race to the stars as a
means to absorb its overproduction while maintaining its technology.

The Gryce Expedition lit a fire in the boy Englehart which nothing could
extinguish—nothing but his own incalculable energy, which he turned so
strangely on it when he put it out. The epic is in error when it states
that Gryce taught the boy; they never met. But Englehart followed
Gryce’s every move in the newspapers, on the air—by a prepathic device
known as radio—and through more esoteric talks with astronomers who had
fallen under the spell of his exuberant genius. Englehart’s feeling for
Gryce was an exaggerated hero-worship. When Gryce’s interstellar drive
was announced, it is said that the boy, then thirteen, burst into tears
of joy; and when a professional writer dared to challenge Gryce’s
theories on the grounds that interplanetary travel had not yet been
developed, and said that Gryce was a visionary and a mountebank, the
youth traveled fifteen hundred miles by begging rides from travelers,
and physically attacked the writer.

Gryce took off in his ship the _Falu_—so named from the initials of the
society which built it, the First Antares League Union, and not, as
Umber so flamboyantly put it, “In honor of the burning infant genius of
Englehart.” Englehart, whose given name was Samuel, took the name of
Falu after the ship, for he identified himself completely with it, and
wanted no one to identify him otherwise.

At eighteen Falu Englehart, purely by the violence of his own desires,
secured a menial position with the Gryce Laboratories and soon was at
work on the counterpart of the interstellar drive which had taken Gryce
away—forever. Of his years with Gryce Laboratories there is little
record, and it is a temptation to succumb, as Umber did, to the
manufacture of such a record out of Englehart’s prodigious enthusiasm
and the act of his departure in his own ship, _Gryce_, thirty years
later.

It is certain, however, that he clung to the hope that Gryce would
return longer than anyone else alive, and that he transmuted his hope
into a determination to follow, and find out what had happened to the
great man. One may learn something of the utter dedication of
Englehart’s life by realizing that he regarded his own genius, which far
outshone that of Gryce, as a secondary thing—perhaps a negligible one.
But Englehart’s talent was more than a scientific one; in the trouble
days of the ship _Gryce’s_ departure, the lush days of government grants
and popular subscriptions were over, and the union of local Antares
Leagues had withered and died with the fading hope of Gryce’s return.
Somehow or other Englehart took the wreckage and leavings of Gryce’s
work and built with them; somehow he took upon himself the appalling
task of financing the work; somehow he procured materials, met payrolls,
and kept men working for him in the heat and light of his incandescent
purpose.

When the _Gryce_ was ready for launching, Englehart was nearly fifty
years old, and in those days, fifty years marked the autumn of middle
age. Umber’s poetry sketches him vaguely, but gives me an impression of
a tall, compelling man, a voice like deep music, eyes filled with the
immensities. Actually, Englehart was a pudgy little man of fifty, nearly
bald, unmarried—and this was not a difficult state to maintain for him
or for the few women he met—and, for all his monomania, a gentle-spoken
citizen save when he was crossed; and then his compulsion was not that
of magnetism, but of sheer nuisance.

He was nearly as forgotten by the world as Gryce, at launching time,
except for sensationalist writers who drew on his manifest folly for
humorous material from time to time. There was a stir of interest when
it was known that he was gone, and his epitaph was written in pity and
laughter, and in one or two cases, with an expression of genuine respect
for his astonishing dynamism. No one respected his purpose, his goal.

And then he did the most astonishing thing of his surprising life. He
came back.

His ship materialized inside the orbit of Mars, causing a warping-eddy
perilously close to a primitive exploring ship, one of those pioneer
interplanetary reaction-drive contraptions that had been developed since
Gryce’s disappearance. Englehart himself made no calls, but the pioneers
did, and Earth was ready for him when he warped in. He was welcomed as a
hero, as a conquistador, a demigod. He was none of these. He was a man
who, for half a century, should have been exhausted, but had never
thought of it until now. It would seem that even the irony of his
return, not only from the grave, but from obscurity, escaped him
completely. He showed no emotion whatsoever except a dogged
determination to destroy his ship, its drive, and everything pertaining
to them; to spend the rest of his life in preventing mankind from ever
again trying to reach the stars.

That he did this effectively, we know. For years he had had sole
possession of the Gryce premises and records, and the men who had helped
him and Gryce never had been able to understand, fully, the principles
of the drive. Neither Gryce nor Englehart were teachers; they were
doers, and apparently certain esoteric syntheses were done by no one
else.

Englehart landed in the Chesapeake Bay in Old North America and was
taken off, along with one of the two men who had gone with him—one of
them had died on the trip—by the hysterically cheering crew of a
towing-craft of some description. The _Gryce_ was anchored, and
Englehart was seen to lock the port with a magnekey. That same night the
_Gryce_ pulled her moorings, mysteriously took off out of control, and
crashed into the ocean three hundred kilometers off shore. She
apparently sank to the bottom and then exploded horrendously; nothing
recognizable was ever found of her.

And, shortly after Englehart returned to the old Gryce plant, which had
been under lock and key during his absence, there was an explosion and
fire there which destroyed everything.

He made as few statements as he possibly could; the gist of them was
that he had not found Gryce, though he still would not admit that Gryce
was dead; that he had emerged from his drive “capsule” in a portion of
space which he did not recognize, and had spent the entire four years of
his trip in an attempt to find his way back; that certain
one-in-a-billion combinations of space stresses had made his flight
possible at all, that the odds were incalculable against its ever being
done again. He published these statements along with a short thesis on
the mathematical theory of his drive, and a series of patently
sequential formulae which proved the drive impracticable, the
directional control impossible, and his return miraculous. The
mathematical philosopher who discovered his reasoning fallacious, and
further proved that the fallacy was purposely brought into the
calculations, was not born for another two hundred years, and by that
time there was hardly industry left on Earth to produce a clock, much
less an interstellar drive. We could build such a thing today,
certainly; and certainly we shall not. And the debt we owe Falu
Englehart is beyond measure.

This pudgy colossus had a crew of two, a man of forty named Horton or
Hawton who was an engineer, and a creature called Gudge, who was
apparently some sort of menial, a twisted being of great strength. What
his background was is not known. He was feted on his return to Earth
with Englehart; and little as Englehart said, Gudge said so much less
that it was believed that he was deaf and dumb. This is not true. He was
certainly warped in body and mind, a man of intense secretiveness, and
the possessor of a mad philosophy of ego-isolation which is beyond
understanding. He had one amusement, and until very recently no one ever
suspected it. He wrote.

He had, apparently, the dexterity of those who write long passages of
verse on grains of rice, and he must have been able to do it in the
dark. Certainly Englehart never dreamed that he was doing it. If he had,
Englehart would have come back alone. We must picture for ourselves the
great, ugly hulk of Gudge, curled on his bunk around his knotted careful
hands, while his stylus made studied, microscopic marks on enduring
vellumplex. There must have been no detectable sound, and no motion but
his controlled breathing and the tiny jumping of a muscle at the base of
his thumb. Certainly it is a picture that Gudge never drew for us; no
man ever had less to say about himself. And the events that led up to
the entombment of the script, cast into a block of plastic that was
carved, possibly by Gudge himself, into the only replica of the ship
_Gryce_ ever preserved—the concealment of the many sheets somewhere
about his misshapen person, the risk he ran on leaving the ship with
Englehart while carrying them, and his motivation in concealing them in
an artifact that he knew would be preserved intact—these are things,
also, at which we must guess. One wonders what the poet Umber would have
done with the information. Gudge probably would have found his way into
the epic as a doughty Boswell, and the murder of Hawton would have
provided a fine counterplot of mutiny.

Much of Gudge’s writing is maundering in his own idiom: without
background or references, it is impossible to decipher. “They talked
about loyalty,” he wrote, near what, in order of pages at least, seems
to be the beginning. “You do what you do because it is the last part of
what you have done, and the first part of what you will do. Loyalty is
the problem of minds which can think of stopping before the end, to take
up something else after it has begun.”

And “Gryce is a lover, pursuing the stars, and Falu, who never knew a
mother, wants to be the mother of Gryce.”

Between and among these extraordinary reflections, Gudge wrote enough
about the trip so that a narrative emerges.

“Falu said to sleep in the ship. I thought there would be more boxes to
pack but when I saw his face, his mouth so tight, his upper lip
ballooning with the pressure inside, his eyes with bright tears in them
behind the thick glasses, the glasses so thick the glass was frosted at
the edges—why, I knew where we were going, and I did not ask about the
boxes. I went into the ship and Hawton was there and Falu came after.
And he did not take Pag and Freehold and the three Poynters, but locked
the port. I saw them out there, understanding and frightened, and they
ran away.”

Who were these five, and where did they go? And had they thought they
were to leave with the ship?

“The noise of the jets was always a terror; a scream first, and then a
blowtorch, and as we moved, a great blowtorch in a barrel. I fell and
was hurt. Horton came to me, holding to the corridor rails. I could hear
his hands crackling. He put me to a bunk, and straps. He strapped
himself, too. We were very heavy.”

So they blasted off—how far, and for how long, it is hard to tell.
Probably it was a long time. There is a brief reference to Saturn “like
two hats covering their mouths, one with another,” and a period after
that. Then there is one of the few references to Gudge himself, and his
strange attitude. “Horton struck me, which did not hurt me and which
made him foolish. He said I should have shown him the leg so it could be
cured. I think a man should die if he cannot mend himself. Hawton put me
on the bunk and with rays and a paste, mended me.”

How long had it been—two months—three, since Gudge hurt himself on the
takeoff? And yet he had no complaint to make then, nor when it got
worse, nor when Horton struck him for it, nor when he treated the leg.
One cannot help wondering whether Gudge was animal-like, abject, broken,
or whether he had a strange, ascetic dignity.

“Falu put on the big ones. They started slowly, down in the belly of the
ship, and Falu stood in the control room watching the meters. The big
ones rumbled and rumbled, and though it never grew louder, it crept into
the blood; the heart was pumping the rumble, the water we drank was full
of the rumble, rumble.

“Hawton was white and sweaty. He put his hands on his temples and
squeezed, and cried to Falu, ‘Englehart, in Heaven’s name, how much more
of this do we have to take?’ and Falu talked to the instruments and
said, ‘Not much more. We take off from the peak of one of these
vibrations, but we’ve got to be vibrating in unison, or we’ll never get
together in one piece.’

“A gong sounded, and light flashed on the board. Falu reached and
chopped off the ignition, and the jets were silent, which was a terrible
thing, for it left the big ones shrieking. I could hear them, and I
could not, and they seemed to be tearing my blood apart. Horton cried.

“Falu was wet but quiet. He braced his knees between the chart table
supports and passed his hand over the spot of light.”

(This was undoubtedly some sort of photoelectric control, installed in
anticipation of the devastating effects of the capsule-entry on the
motor center. It is remarkable that Falu could direct his hand to it at
such a time.)

“Then we were blind,” Gudge wrote, “and I heard them fall as I fell. We
could not see and we could not move, but we were glad, because the
silence was blessed.”

There is a gap here in the narrative. Apparently some time—ship’s
time—passed, and their sight and motive power returned to them. Gudge
wrote a great deal about the insubstantial appearance of everything
aboard, and the changing shapes of utensils and stanchions. It would
seem that Gudge’s ordinary observations, even in normal space, were
somewhat similar; that is, everything, to him, was wavering and
distorted, and he was more fit to adjust to the strange conditions of an
encapsulated ship. Englehart doggedly and stolidly went about the ship’s
business with a furious pretense of normalcy. There is no mention of
Horton, and it is probable that he simply withdrew into himself.

And then they emerged. “Never was there such hurt,” wrote the man who
had not complained of a takeoff injury for months, “never such bathing
in pain, such twisting and writhing. Hawton’s arm tensed against itself
and I heard the bone break. Falu sat at the chart table, his hands
frozen to the edges, pulling himself on to it until thought he would cut
himself in two. He screamed more than Hawton.”

They lay in space for some time, recovering from the brutal transition.
Near them was a reddish sun. In all likelihood it was Antares; it was
for Antares that Gryce had set his course, and the one-time popular
Antares Leagues had that star as their goal, once the etheric drift
theory showed that for all its distance it would be easiest to reach. It
is difficult to be sure, however, since there is no record of the
capsule-time Englehart spent, nor any real indication of his temporal
directions.

They fired up the reaction drive and began to move toward the sun. With
the restoration of gravity, Horton found it impossible to keep his food
down, and Englehart complained of a splitting headache. These conditions
apparently continued until the return.

Englehart ate and slept and lived at his instruments. And one day—

“I brought him his broth, and just as I set it down, Falu’s breath
whistled suddenly, once, through a tight throat. He stared at the screen
and cried for Horton.

“The screen was the large one for seeing ahead. It had colors. Space,
outside the corona of the sun, was the color of a purple bruise, and
beyond that black; and in the black floated a planet like Earth.

“But what made Falu cry out was the sight of the glimmering bowls, like
parachutes without shrouds, which rushed toward us. I think there were
seven.

“ ‘Ships!’ shouted Hawton. ‘Englehart—are they ships?’

“Falu said nothing then, but made us heavy as usual.”

(This odd phrase probably means that he cut the drive to one Earth
gravity.)

“The bowl-ships were in a single line, but as we watched, they deployed,
the leader rising, the last dropping, the others flanking, until they
approached us as a ring.

“ ‘They’re going to box us,’ Hawton said. He was frightened. Falu said,
‘They can’t, at our combined speeds. Watch.’

“He set the starboard jet to roaring, and the ring of bowl-ships began
to march sidewise across the screen as we turned.

“But Falu was wrong. The ring of bowl-ships, quite unchanged, began to
shift with us, and it seemed that the planet and the stars were moving
instead, and that the ring was painted on our screen.

“Falu shook his head and peered at them through his thick glasses. ‘How
can they do it without killing everyone aboard them?’

“Horton said something about overcoming inertia. He said that perhaps
there was nothing alive aboard the ships. He glistened with fear.

“When the ring of ships was centered on our screen again, Falu put his
hand to the board and drove us harder so that we were heavy again. The
ships began to grow, the ring widened, but with nearness. Falu said,
through closed teeth, ‘Then we’ll go through them. Turning like that is
one thing; to stop and follow is something else again.’

“ ‘They’ll fire on us,’ Hawton whimpered. ‘Falu—use the capsule drive!’

Falu snarled like an animal, and his voice was like a whip for animals.
‘Don’t be stupid. It takes three days to build up resonance for the
capsule. They’ll be on us in an hour. Sit down and be quiet.’

“The ships grew and the ring widened until we could see the markings on
their silver sides, red and blue, and the triangular openings around
their bottom edges. Falu clicked on the small screens—sides, above,
below—as we entered the ring.

“And at the instant we entered the ring, there were two ships above us,
and two high on each side, and two low on each side, and one beneath—and
they stayed with us. They approached us, they stopped and reversed to go
with us, all in that instant of surrounding.

“Falu tried his forward jets, and then one side and the other, but the
ring of ships stayed around us. They had no jets.

“And then, in the next hour, the ring began to shift, with those high on
the right coming closer to us, and those low on the left moving away.
Falu watched them, leaving his controls alone, while Hawton danced about
him, mouthing advice. Falu did not answer him, but at last called me.
‘Gudge—get him out of sight.’ I went to Horton and pointed to his bunk
room. He pushed me away. I hit him on the neck and put him on the bunk.
I was careful of his broken arm. I think the pain he had been through
had soured him through and through, like old warm milk.

“Falu waited and watched, while the ships above came closer and closer,
and those below on the other side drifted away. Falu muttered, ‘They’ll
crash us if they keep that up.’ And closer they came, and Falu watched
them and I stood behind him, watching, too.

“At last Falu grunted and turned to his controls. The near ships seemed
close enough to touch with the hand. Falu jetted away from them, down
and away to the center of the ring. And it happened that that put the
nose of our ship again on the planet; and now the ring of ships stayed
equally distant from us as we drove toward this new world. Twice more in
the next twenty hours Falu tried to change course, but each time the
strange ships led us back toward the planet.

“Hawton cried to be freed. Falu told me to unstrap him. Hawton was
angry. He told me he would kill me if I ever touched him again. I said
nothing and thought my own thoughts. He went to the control room and
stared silently at the screens. Falu said, ‘Try to keep your head,
Horton. Those ships want us to go to the planet. We were going there
anyway; Gryce probably went there, too. So far these ships have made no
hostile move except to keep us on course. They outnumber us and there is
nothing we can do but go along with them.’

“Horton looked at the screens and trembled, and said nothing about the
ships at all. Instead he said ‘What did you bring that stupid slug along
for?’ He meant me.

“Falu said, ‘Because he does his work and he keeps his mouth shut. Try
it.’ I knew then that Horton would hate me as long as he lived. He went
to the settee by the port bulkhead and sat there with this arms folded
around his hate.”

There follows, in Gudge’s account, another of those indeterminate
periods of idiomatic reflection, in which Falu Englehart, Horton, and
the lost Gryce expedition have no part. Probably some days passed, in
which there was little to do except wait until they reached wherever it
was that the bowl-ships intended to take them. Perhaps nine days
passed—it may have been more. In any case, Gudge interrupted in
mid-sentence an extraordinary series of thoughts on the similarity of
his reactions to sound and to color: “They say all anger is red. Anger
is not red while Red is peace in a bright light with your eyes closed—”
to write:

“It looked like Earth at first, but not as blue. There were ice-caps and
seas, and many clouds. Falu turned the magnescope on it, and when it
could find rifts in the roiling clouds, valleys could be seen, and
mountains, and once a rapid river. There were cities, too. I saw no life
in them.

“The bowl-ships forced us around the planet. Falu said we were in a
closed orbit. We stopped using the jets, and drifted weightless around
the planet.

“Two of the ships fell away from the ring and dropped toward the blue
world. Before them a great green light fanned out, and where it touched
the clouds they were gone. Down and down they went, circling around each
other and destroying the clouds beneath us until we could see perhaps a
quarter of a planet.

“The planet had a burned face. Burned and pitted and twisted, gouged
out, melted, blasted. For miles around a boiling hell-pit which threw
molten gobs of rock high in the air, the land was sere and smoking. The
planet had a face like my face. The two ships came back up to
airlessness, and clouds swirled in and mercifully covered the planet’s
face.

“The two ships flashed past us, spacewards, and the other five began
nudging us to follow. Falu ignited the jets, and Horton, who was taking
courage now, helped him trim the ship to keep it inside the ring
formation. They talked of the blasted planet, wonderingly. Earth had
never seen such a cataclysm.

“ ‘They showed it to us,’ breathed Falu. ‘They just showed it to us, and
then took us away. Why? Who are they? Why don’t they attack or free us?
Why have we never seen ships like this in our System? Their science—’
and he fell silent, awed. Falu was awed.”

Falu’s awe is the only thing on which Gudge expresses astonishment.
Apparently it shook Gudge to his roots, sending him off into a wild
metaphysical orgy on the subject of constancy in the universe, and the
half-dozen things he had felt he could rely upon to remain unchanged—the
color of interstellar space; each man’s threshold of pain; what he
called “the touch of greenness”; and two other items which are
abbreviated and undecodable. If Gudge were not completely mad, he had a
set of sensitivities completely alien to any human norm.

At this point in his narrative it is necessary to fill in certain
movements which must have occurred, unmentioned by the chronicler. For
his next mention of their trip describes four of the five escort ships
deployed in a square before them, with the fifth above, and the other
two holding a body, “a rock as big as our factory on Earth” between them
by orange beams of light. These must have been the two ships which went
down to disperse the clouds, and which led the flotilla out from the
planet. Apparently they went to capture this asteroid and bring it to a
rendezvous in space. At the rendezvous, the seven ships were motionless
in relation to the _Gryce_.

“The four ships made a square, perhaps two miles on a side. There was a
dim purple glow from a single plate on each side of each ship, and from
this purple spot a blackness gathered and spread. Whether it was gas or
dust or a substance, we could not tell. It reached out from the four
ships, filling the square of space between them, blotting out the stars,
until it lay like a great black blanket in space.

“And then lights appeared on the expanse of blackness—a yellow triangle,
a red circle, a series of coruscating amber lines, moving and merging,
writhing about, forming mosaic and kaleidoscopic patterns. We were all
three spellbound, watching them, and this, apparently, was what the
aliens wanted of us.

“For they began to show us pictures, and never have there been such
pictures, such blendings of color and proportion. The black velvet of
the screen on which they were projected—or which projected them to
us—lent a depth that made the screen more a vast window through which we
looked at happenings, rather than a mere picture. I could understand why
Falu cried out wordlessly and leapt to his feet when the designs faded
away and were replaced suddenly, brilliantly, by the picture that had
burned in his brain since he was a downy youth; for here, with colors
and depth, was the shape of his dream.

“A ship. An Earth ship.

“The _Falu_ herself.

“She was shown from behind and above, gleaming and beautiful, and before
her were the edge of the red sun and the cloudy planet we had seen.

“We saw the planet come nearer, but with the action speeded up so that
it swelled visibly, and we understood that this would be a reenactment
of what had happened to the _Falu_.

“Until the planet was a great curving mass filling the lower half of the
picture, the _Falu’s_ broad shining back was in the foreground, but now
it receded from us, curving down and away toward the clouds. And
suddenly the picture was gone.

“It was replaced by another view of the cloudy sphere, and in a moment
there was a rift in the clouds through which we saw a valley, not brown
like the ones we had actually seen, but green and lush. There was a
river set about with groves of feathery trees, and there were rolling
fields under cultivation. Some of these were blood-red, some fallow,
some pale blue with blossoms. It was a rich and peaceful valley.

“The view followed it upstream. There were boats on the water, moving
rapidly without sails or turbulence in their wakes, and soon there was a
city.

“It was a low, wide city of low, wide houses, not crowded together like
Earth cities, but parklike. The water’s edge was not bunioned with
cramped and rusty sheds and quays, but forest and lawn. We could see the
prim openings here and there into which towboats and barges slipped into
the bank and disappeared, probably to underground terminals.

“The view, the camera-eye, swept down into the city and slowed, as if
one were driving through the wide streets. As it swung from side to
side, we saw the planet’s people.

“They were not human. They were bipeds with strange flexible legs having
two knee-joints each. Their arms were set low on their bodies, and were
jointed differently from those of humanity, bending up and downward like
the claws of a mantis, rather than down and forward like the arms of a
man. Their heads and faces were tiny and grotesquely human, except for
the placement of ear-flaps where cheekbones should be. Their bodies
extended downward past the hips, terminating in a flattened point on
which they sat, bracing themselves with legs folded to make a
three-point support; they used no chairs.

“They were busy people. We saw pictures of them making metal beams in
great automatic forges, growing food in tanks, and making paint and
tools. There were beds of truly gorgeous flowers, and parks in which
were shapes of stone that must have been sculpture, though none
resembled the people; but people walked among them.

“Through the city the pictures took us, and it was a wondrous thing. It
made one realize that this was a people completely in command of itself;
that it used its resources and did not abuse them; that the stretches of
wild country we saw around the city were so because the people wanted it
so, and not because there was any frontier which they could not conquer.

“Outside the city again the pictures showed us a wide expanse that at
first view seemed to be an airfield; indeed it was so, but it was
something more. There were launching cradles on which rested great
ships—ships ten times the size of the _Falu_ and the _Gryce_, though of
roughly the same pattern; and in addition were the bowl-ships, a row of
perhaps thirty of them. There were some small ones, but most of them
were two hundred feet or more across.

“Then, in a beautifully synthesized picture diagram, we saw one of the
ovoid ships leave its cradle in a cloud of flame, and mount the sky; and
behind it appeared a silver dotted line, while the whole picture
contracted as if the camera were leaping away from the planet, back and
back, until it was a ball again, and the dotted line showing us the
course of the ship; and still back and back, until the red sun itself
was a small disk and the cloudy planet a dot, and the dotted silver line
reached outward until it touched another planet.

“And suddenly, making us gasp with the brilliance of it, the same dotted
silver lines appeared throughout a system of the red sun and seven
planets—a great silver network of them.

“Hawton said, ‘I don’t understand.’

“Falu Englehart growled at him, without turning his face from the
screen, ‘Their commerce, stupid. They’re showing us that they have a
highly developed space commerce.’

“The pictures changed again; again we saw the spaceport, and the
aircraft, and the rocketship ramps, and the camera swung to show us the
bowl-ships. One of them lifted; but here was no screaming flame, no gout
of dust. Here was simply the balloonlike lifting of the whole sweetly
curved structure of the ship, up and up into the iridescent sky. And now
there was a golden dotted line; and again we had the breathtaking
recession from the planet. But this time it was a greater one; this time
it left the red sun, and the stars about it rushed together, until we
saw a whole segment of the galaxy, thousands of suns. And yet the golden
line went out and out, until at last it touched a blue-white star. And
then there was a network again, this time golden, and so vast that one
wanted to cry. For the whole galaxy seemed woven together with a fabric
of golden threads.

“Hawton snorted. ‘I don’t believe it. That simply can’t be. They’re
lying to us. If they had a commerce like that, we’d have had them on
Earth thousands of years ago.’

“Falu said, ‘Wait.’

“The cosmic picture winked out, and after a moment of that total
blackness, we saw again the picture of Gryce’s ship, the _Falu_,
spinning down into the clouds of the planet we had visited.

“As she entered the gaseous envelope, a flame appeared, purple, but
blue-white at the center, around the _Falu_. And in a moment, the whole
side of the planet seemed to open outward in one furious, hellish blast.
Falu grunted and covered his eyes against that terrible radiance, and
Horton closed his and wrinkled up his face, turning away.

“Down and down the picture-eye took us, to the infuriated clouds. It
swept us along the valley we had seen before, and as we reached the same
city street, we saw the people stop in the shops, in the factories and
parks, and turn as one to the sky. A great glare, purple and white,
filled the scene, and the ground came up once, twice, again, hurling the
people off their feet, bringing the buildings down on them. Here an
inhabitant holding two young ones was crushed; there another fell into
the gaping mouth of a crack in the Earth, which closed on him.

“Out we were taken, to the spaceport. We saw a rocket blast off just as
its cradle crumpled, and the ship wavered, turned, and crashed into the
row of bowl-ships. Great ravines appeared on the smooth landing area;
and then we saw, in the distance, a gleaming cliff that was not a cliff,
but a towering continent of water, rushing toward us. So real was this
that as it approached the picture’s foreground, we all found ourselves
in our own control cabin, shaken and looking at each other foolishly.

“Now the picture was of the planet again, back and back from the planet
with its ravening scar, back to show the whole system of the red sun.
Again we saw the silver network, and part of the greater, golden one;
and where they based on the cloudy planet, those lines dimmed and died
out, until at last the planet lay deserted, alone, unwanted, and dead.

“Once more the picture brought us to the planet, only briefly, to show
up again the wrack and ruin, the burned, broken, murdered thing that we
had seen before with our own eyes, when the two bowl-ships had opened
the clouds for us. And then the great screen went dark.

“ ‘I don’t understand,’ whispered Hawton. ‘Gryce went to that planet and
something happened, something that—’

“ ‘Wait,’ Falu said again.

“And now the two bowl-ships which bore between them, on beams of orange
light, the great rock which was as big as our factory on Earth, came
forward. They swung the rock between us and the strange black screen
steadied it, and their orange rays disappeared. The ships withdrew to a
point above us.

“There was a picture again on the huge screen, a picture of our ship,
seen from a point just at the other side of the floating rock. We saw,
at the side of the image of our ship, a movement, as something came from
it toward the rock. It drifted out until it touched the rock, and just
before it touched, we saw it was a piece of metal, a block. Then the
picture disappeared, to be replaced immediately by the same scene, the
only difference being that the object, when it came near enough to see,
was a metal disk. Again the picture disappeared and repeated itself, but
this time the object which came from our ship was a cube.

“Again and again this was repeated, this scene of some object being
projected from our ship to the rock, and each time the object was
different. Sometimes it was metal with a silver or golden luster, and
sometimes it was a smaller piece of rock, and sometimes a red or green
or yellow lump of plastic. I understood what they wanted of us, but said
nothing.”

(Why did Gudge never, or almost never, speak?)

“Falu, watching this reiteration for the twentieth time, said, ‘They
want us to do something. They want us to throw something out to that
rock. I wonder what exactly they want us to throw?’

“And Hawton said, ‘From the looks of those pictures, it might be almost
anything.’

“Falu said, ‘Well, let’s throw something. Gudge—’

“But I had already gone, as soon as Falu said he wanted it done. In the
after storeroom was a dense roll of insulex for space repair. There was
more. It weighed four hundred pounds on Earth, but nothing here, of
course. I cast off its buckle-clamps and brought it out to the disposal
chute. Beside it I put a pressure-bottle of carbon dioxide. Then I
waited. Falu came aft to watch me, and said, ‘You know, Gudge, sometimes
I wonder just where the limits of your mind are. Yes, I’ll turn the
ship.’ He was always surprised when I understood anything before he did.
Hawton was never surprised. He forgot it, time and time again, because
he wanted to.

“With the steering jets Falu gently nudged the ship over so that the
disposal lock pointed directly at the rock. As soon as his jets
appeared, the pictures on the black screen ceased, and all of the ships
around us withdrew perhaps a hundred miles, in a single instant.

“I put the roll of insulex and the bottle in the disposal lock, tripped
the trigger on the bottle, and slammed the inside port as the carbon
dioxide began whistling out. In a moment the bottle was empty and the
lock full of gas under pressure. When Falu had steadied the ship and
called out to me, I turned the valve that opened the outer port, and
with a _whoosh_ the gas swept out, taking the insulex with it. Then I
went to the control room and stood again behind Falu, where I could see
the forward visiscreen.

“The bulky roll turned slowly end over end as it flew, in the spot of
light that Hawton kept on it with the pistol-grip control over the chart
table. It needed no light when it struck, though—

“And I thought it was going to miss! It barely touched, and yet—

“Before us, we saw a miniature of what had happened to the cloudy
planet—a miniature, because it was only a roll of insulex and a fragment
of rock compared with the mass of the _Falu_ and an entire planet. But
it was a miniature close to our eyes, too close. Had we known, we could
have put the filters up over the viewing cells; at least we could have
looked away.

“In the split second before the cells went out, we got a flash of that
white and purple radiance that was knives in our eyes, and then
blindness, for our ship and for us. And I know that as I lie dying I
shall carry still a tattered shard of that frightful brilliance in my
old eyes. In that moment there was nothing to do, no thought to pass, no
move to make but to claw at the eyes which had captured and held white
flame behind their lids.

“It was an hour before we could see dimly again, and six before we could
ship new cells on the forward and low starboard viewers.

“And there on the restored screen we saw the seven bowl-ships, patiently
and passively waiting some sign from us. Falu shoved the trembling,
red-eyed Hawton aside and grasped the searchlight grip. ‘I want the rest
of it,’ he said. His face was deeply scored, pouchy. The loss of his
dream of finding Gryce was as much as he could bear—all the burden he
could ever carry. Anything else he might learn would be a small thing
indeed. He blinked the light.

“The four bowl-ships had restored, or rebuilt, the great screen. Again
we saw the shifting patterns and mosaics, which were apparently their
‘ready’ signal. And then there were more pictures.

“First a picture of our roll of insulex and the rock, and then, in that
bewildering fashion, the picture became a diagram. The roll of insulex
turned into a glowing ruby color, ran together, separated into two blobs
which in turn became two cubes. They approached each other, touched,
separated, touched again, separated and were still.

“Then the rock was shown, and it turned a shimmering yellow; and it,
too, ran together into a formless mass, separated into two cubes. And
these too, came together and moved apart.

“Next, all four cubes were shown, the two red and the two yellow, the
red above, the yellow below; and a red and yellow cube changed places. A
red cube moved and touched a yellow—and both dissolved in ghastly,
glaring flame. And again, the remaining yellow cube moved and touched
the red one, and they married in purple-white violence and were gone.
And Falu breathed, ‘I think I see—’

“The pictures then repeated the scene of Gryce’s ship, the _Falu_,
approaching the cloudy world. And then the scene was frozen into a still
photograph, and the _Falu_ turned the same glowing red as had the
insulex, while the planet was shown in the shimmering yellow.

“The red ship moved down to the yellow planet and devastated it.

“We were then shown a picture of our own ship as it released the
insulex. Ship and insulex turned red as the rock fragment and the
bowl-ships turned yellow; and when our red property touched the yellow
rock, the hell was loosed again.

“And now we saw the great expanding chart of the galaxy, and on it again
were superimposed the shining networks of dotted gold and silver lines,
showing the wide commerce of these people. And suddenly every sun and
planet was the shimmering yellow—every one, except for a scattering of
red here and there near the edges of the galaxy.

“The eye of the camera moved to one of these red spots, expanded it, and
we saw Sol and her planets, all untouched by the shining network, and
all of them but the retrograde moon of Uranus, in glowing ruby.

“We saw a new kind of dotted line, the deadly red this time, leave the
third planet, and followed it across the corner of the universe to the
cloudy planet, and saw for the third time the picture of the _Falu_
plunging into the deadly clouds.

“After that, the black screen dissolved and the seven ships took up
their ring position around us again.

“Slowly, with sick hands, Falu Englehart fired the jets and swung the
ship about. Hawton cried, ‘What are you doing?’

“Tiredly, Falu said, ‘Going back, Horton. Back.’

“Hawton ran to the screen. ‘They’ll kill us! They’ll kill us!’

“Falu glanced briefly at the seven ships. They were not moving. Still in
a ring, they were motionless, letting us leave them behind. ‘They’d kill
us if we went toward their planets, or any other sun in the universe but
Sol—or one or two others. They won’t kill us if we go home. They wanted
us to know what we are. They’ve known it for … for eons. And they want
us to go home and tell our people. The fools!’ he spat suddenly. ’Gryce
surprised them. They didn’t know we had advanced as far as
capsule-flight. Gryce did it, and I followed, and they judge all
humanity by Gryce. They don’t know, they just don’t know—”

“Hawton said he only partly understood. ‘I mean, I know that when we
contact them, there is an insane violence; but why? Why?’

“ ‘They’re contraterrene,’ said Falu.

“Hawton grunted in surprise. ‘I thought that was simply an idle
amusement for theoretical physicists.’

“Falu waved at the screens. ‘You saw.’

“ ‘Contraterrene,’ Hawton mused. ‘Matter with the signs transposed—atoms
with negative nuclei, and positive satellite-shells. And when terrene
matter comes close, the whole thing becomes unstable and turns to
energy. _Falu!_ Were they telling us that the whole universe, except Sol
and a few other outer-edge stars are contraterrene?’ I think that only
at that moment had Hawton received the full impact of what he had seen
with his own eyes.

“Falu simply nodded tiredly.

“And they have commerce—galaxy-wide commerce, and civilizations on every
habitable planet, while we—”

“ ‘We’re in the corner. Excommunicado. Left to our own devices, as long
as those devices don’t bring us to contact them,’ Falu finished.”

With the bland _non sequitur_ quality of his writing, Gudge here departs
from the narrative, in a welter of thoughts of his own. He looked on
Englehart and Horton—(Hawton?)—with new eyes; indeed, he seemed to
regard all of humanity in a new way. He himself had always lived “in
Coventry”—out of contact with those around him; and he seemed to take a
certain pleasure in the chance to regard all mankind as in the same
position. These long and gleeful passages contain nothing of the events
which followed, except for one brief and important scene:

“Falu had told him and told him not to say it again, but he did. He
shrieked at Falu. He said, ‘You must tell the world, Falu! You’ll be
great, don’t you see? Terrene beings can rule the galaxy. What science
would the Contraterrene peoples share with us, to appease us? What man
could fail to see the advantage of his unique position, when every stone
he throws can be an atomic bomb? Let us build a fleet of Gryce-drive
capsule ships, and go out and demand equality in the universe!’

“Falu said, ‘Hawton, for the last time—for really and truly the last
time—the Earth isn’t ready for this yet. What you suggest would have one
of two results; if we succeeded, which isn’t likely, we would only bring
terror and destruction into a highly organized, peaceful universe—just
as we have brought it on ourselves repeatedly. The other and more likely
result is that before we could launch our ships, the Contraterrenes
would wipe us out. There will be no more picture-shows. We have already
killed a planet; in return they gave us some information about ourselves
which we had not known. The next time we make a move toward them, they
will destroy us with a clear conscience. I don’t doubt for a moment
their ability to hurl a planet the size of Earth into Sol, and then you
know what would happen. You’ve studied supernovae.’

“ ‘You’re an idealistic child,’ Hawton screamed. ‘And if you won’t tell
the world, I will.’

“Falu squinted up at him through his heavy glasses. He saw, I think, the
beginnings of fanatic purpose in the man. ‘Gudge,’ he said.

“I went to him. He pointed his finger at Hawton, and said, ‘Gudge, kill
him.’

“So I did, with my hands, very quickly, and put him into the disposal
lock and turned the valve.

“When I came back Falu looked at me strangely. ‘I suppose I should kill
you, monster,’ he said. ‘Can I rely on your not talking?’

“I said nothing. Suddenly he shrugged. ‘I’d give a whole lot to know
what goes on in that ugly head of yours. If I wanted to kill you, I
don’t believe you’d try to stop me. Right?’

“I nodded, pitying him a little, for he was thinking about loyalty and
wondering why I had given him mine; he did not know that one goes on
doing what one is doing, and never stops.”

And that is how, according to the sheets found in a carven spaceship
model, Samuel Falu Englehart made his journey, and how he saved us from
certain doom at the hands of those who are perfectly willing to leave us
alone. Now we can know the story, for we are grown and no longer
acquisitive, and have our farms and our minds, and can bridge space
telepathically, wherein there is no valence.



PRODIGY


MAYB, CHIEF GUARDIAN for the Third Sector of the Crèche, writhed in her
sleep. She pressed her grizzled head into the mattress, and her face
twisted. She was deep in slumber, but slumber could not keep out the
niggling, soundless, insistent pressure that had slipped into her mind.
Sleep was as futile a guard as the sheet which she instinctively pulled
up about her ears.

_“Mayb!”_

She rolled over, facing the wall, her mind refusing to distinguish
between the sound of her name in the annunciator and this other, silent,
imperative, thing.

_“Mayb!”_

She opened her eyes, saw on the wall the ruby radiance from the
annunciator light, grunted and sat up, wincing as she recognized
consciously both summonses. Swinging her legs out of the bed, she leaned
forward and threw the toggle on the annunciator. “Yes, Examiner.”

The voice was resonant but plaintive. “Can’t you do something with that
little br—with that Andi child? I need my sleep.”

“I’ll see what he wants,” she said resignedly, “although I _do_ think,
Examiner, that these midnight attentions are doing him more harm than
good. One simply does not cater to children this way.”

“This is not an ordinary child,” said the speaker unnecessarily. “And I
still need my sleep. Do what you can, Mayb. And thank you.” The light
went out.

There was a time, thought Mayb grumpily, as she pulled on her robe, when
I thought I could shield the little demon. I thought I could do
something for him. That was before he began to know his own power.

She let herself out into the hall. “Subtle,” she muttered bitterly.
Sector One, where children entered the Crèche at the age of nine months,
and Sector Two, into which went those who had not fallen by the wayside
in eighteen months of examinations—they were simple. The mutants and the
aberrants were easy to detect. The subtlety came in Sector Three, where
abnormal metabolisms, undeveloped or non-developing limbs or organs, and
high-threshold reactive mentalities were weeded out by the time they got
there and behavior, almost alone, was the key to normality.

Mayb loved children, all children—which was one of the most important
parts of being a Guardian. When it became necessary for her to recommend
a child for Disposal, she sometimes stalled a little, sometimes, after
it was done, cried a great deal. But she did it when it had to be done,
which was the other part of being a good Guardian. She hadn’t been so
good with Andi, though. Perhaps the little demon had crawled farther
into her affections—at first, anyway—with his unpretty, puckish face and
his extraordinary coloring, his toasted-gold hair and the eyes that
should have belonged to a true redhead. She remembered—though at present
it was difficult to recall a tenderness—how she had put aside the first
suspicions that he was an Irregular, how she had tried to imagine signs
that his infuriating demands were temporary, that some normal behavior
might emerge to replace the wild talent for nuisance that he possessed.

On the other hand, she thought as she shuffled down the hall, it may
seem hard-hearted of me, but things like this justify the Code of the
Norm. Things like this can be remembered when we have to send some
completely endearing little moppet into the Quiet Room, to await the
soft hiss of gas and the chute to the incinerator.

Mayb reacted violently to the thought, and wondered, shaking, whether
she was getting calloused in her old age, whether she was turning a
personal resentment on the child because of this personal inconvenience.
She shook off the thought, and for a moment tried not to think at all.
Then came the shadow of a wish for the early days of the Normalcy
program, two centuries before. That must have been wonderful. Normalcy
came first. The children went into the crèches for observation, and were
normal or were disposed of. Homo superior could wait. It was humanity’s
only choice; restore itself to what it had been before the Fourth War—a
mammal which could predictably breed true—or face a future of battles
between mutations which, singly and in groups, would fight holy wars on
the basis of “What I am is normal.”

And now, though the idea behind the program was still the same, and the
organizations of the crèches were still the same, a new idea was gaining
weight daily—to examine Irregulars always more meticulously, with a
view, perhaps, to letting one live—one which might benefit all of
humanity by his very difference; one who might be a genius, a great
artist in some field, or who might have a phenomenal talent for
organizing or some form of engineering. It was the thin end of the wedge
for Homo superior, who would, by definition, be an Irregular.
Irregulars, however, were not necessarily Homo superior, and the
winnowing process could be most trying. As with Andi, for example.

Holding her breath, she opened the door of his cubicle. As she did so
the light came on and the ravening emanation from the child stopped. He
rose up from his bed like a little pink seal and knelt, blinking at her,
in the middle of the bed.

“Now, what do you want?”

“I want a drink of water and a plastibubble and go swimmin’ ” said the
four-year-old.

“Now Andi,” Mayb said, not unkindly, “there’s water right here in your
room. The plastibubbles have all been put away and it isn’t _time_ for
swimming. Why can’t you be a good boy and sleep like all the other
children?”

“I am NOT like the uvver children,” he said emphatically. “I want a
plastibubble.”

Mayb sighed and pulled out an old, old psychological trick. “Which would
you like—a drink of water or a plastibubble?” As she spoke she slid her
foot onto the pedal of the drinking fountain in the corner of the tiny
room. The water gurgled enticingly. Before he was well aware of what he
was doing. Andi was out of bed and slurping up the water, with the
cancellation of his want for the plastibubble taking root in his mind.

“It tas—tuz better when you push the pedal,” he said charmingly.

“Well, that’s sweet of you, Andi. But did you know I was fast asleep and
had to get up and come here to do it?”

“Thass all right,” said Andi blandly.

She turned to the door as he climbed back on the bed. “I wanna go
swimmin’.”

“No one goes swimming at night!”

“Fishes do.”

“You’re not a fish.”

“Well, ducks, then.”

“You’re not—” No; this could go on all night. “You go to sleep, young
fellow.”

“Tell me a story.”

“Now Andi, this isn’t story telling time. I told you a story before
bedtime.”

“You tol’ it to everybody. Now tell it to _me_.”

“I’m sorry, Andi, this isn’t the time,” she said firmly. She touched the
stud which would switch the light off when she closed the door. “Shut
your eyes, now, and have a nice dream. Good night, Andi.”

She closed the door, shaking her head and yawning. And instantly that
soundless, pressurized command began yammering out, unstoppable,
unanswerable. Telepathy was not a novelty nowadays, with the welter of
mutations which had reared their strange, unviable heads since the
Fourth War; but this kind of thing was beyond belief. It was unbearable.
Mayb could sense the Examiner rearing up on his bed, clapping his hands
uselessly over his ears, and swearing volubly. She opened the door.
“Andi!”

“Well, tell me a story.”

“No, Andi!”

He rolled over with his face to the wall. She could see him tensing his
body. At the first wave of fury from him she cried out and struck
herself on the temples. “All right, all right! What story do you want to
hear?”

“Tell me about the bear and the liger.”

She sat down wearily on the bed. He hunkered up with his back to the
wall, his strange auburn eyes round and completely, unmercifully, awake.

“Lie down and I’ll tell you.”

“I do-wanna.”

“Andi,” she said sternly. For once it worked. He lay down. She covered
up his smooth pink body, tucking the sheet-blanket carefully around him
in the way she sometimes did for the others at bedtime. It was a deft
operation, soothing, suggesting warmth and quiet and, above all, sleep.
It did nothing of the kind for Andi.

“Once upon a time there was a bear who was bare because his mother was
radioactive,” she began, “and one day he was walking along beside a neon
mine, when a liger jumped out. Now a liger is half lion and half tiger.
And _he_ said,

“ ‘Hey, you, bear; you have no hair;

You’re not normal; get away there!’

“And the bear said,

‘You chase me, liger, at your peril

You’re not normal because you’re sterile.’

“So they began to fight. The liger fought the bear because he thought it
was right to be natural-born, even if he couldn’t have babies. And the
bear fought the liger because he thought it was right to be what he was
as long as he could have babies, even if his mother was radioactive. So
they fought and they fought until they killed each other dead. And
_that_ was because they were both wrong.

“And then from out of the rocks around the neon mine came a whole
hundred lemmings. And they frisked and played around the dead bear and
the dead liger, and they bred, and pretty soon they had their babies, a
thousand of them, and they all lived and grew fat. And do you know why?”

“What was they?”

“Lemmings. Well, they—”

“I want some lemonade,” said Andi.

Mayb threw up her hands in exasperation. You can’t cure an Irregular by
indoctrination, she thought. She said, “I haven’t finished. You see, the
lemmings lived because their babies were the same as _they_ were. That’s
called breeding true. They were Nor—”

“You know what I’d do if I was a bear without any hair?” Andi shouted,
popping up from under the covers. “I’d rear back at that old liger and
I’d say don’t touch me, you. I hate you and you can’t touch me.” A wave
of emotion from the child nearly knocked Mayb off the bed. “If you come
near me, I’ll make your brains FRY!” and with the last syllable he
loosed a flood of psychic force that made Mayb grunt as if she had
walked into the end of an I-beam in the dark.

Andi lay down again and gave her a sweet smile. “Thass what I’d do,” he
said gently.

“My!” said Mayb. She rose and backed off from him as if he were loaded
with high explosive. The movement was quite involuntary.

“You can go away now,” said Andi.

“All right. Good night, Andi.”

“You better hurry, you ol’ liger you,” he said, raising himself on one
elbow.

She hurried. Outside, she leaned against the door jamb, sweating
profusely. She waited tensely for some further sign from within the
cubicle, and when there was none after minutes, she heaved a vast sigh
of relief and started back to her bed. This was the third time this
week, and the unscheduled nightwork made her feel every one of her
twenty-eight years of service to the Crèche. Fuming and yawning, she
composed herself for what was left of her night’s sleep.

_“Mayb!”_

She twitched in her sleep. _Not again_, said her subconscious. _Oh, not
again. Send him to the Quiet Room and have done with it_. Again she made
the futile, unconscious gesture of pulling the covers over her head.

_“Mayb! Mayb!”_

The annunciator light seemed fainter now, like the slight blush of a
pale person. Mayb lowered the covers from her face and looked at the
wall, blinked, and sat upright with a squeal. Her eye fell on the clock;
she had to look three times to believe what it told her. “Oh no, oh no,”
she said, and threw the toggle. “Yes Examiner. Oh, I’m so _sorry!_ I
overslept and it’s three whole hours. Oh, what shall I do?”

“That part’s all right,” said the speaker. “I had your gong
disconnected. You needed the sleep. But you’d better come to my office.
Andi’s gone.”

“Gone? He can’t be gone. He was just about to go to sl—oh. _Oh!_ The
door! I was so distraught when I left him; I must have left the door
unl … oh-h, Examiner, how awful!”

“It isn’t good,” said the speaker. “Essie took over for you and she’s
new and doesn’t know all the children. So he wasn’t missed until the
Free Time when Observation 2 missed him. Well, come on in. We’ll see
what we can do.” The light went out, and the toggle clicked back.

Mayb muttered a little while she dressed. Up the corridor she flew, down
a resilient ramp and round to the right, where she burst into the door
over which the letters EXAMINER drifted in midair. “Oh dear,” she said
as she huddled to a stop in the middle of a room which was more lounge
than office. “_Dear_ oh, dear—”

“Poor Mayb.” The Examiner was a beaming, tight-skinned pink man with
cotton hair. “You’ve had the worst of this case all along. Don’t blame
yourself so!”

“What shall we do?”

“Do you know Andi’s mother?”

“Yes. Library-Beth.”

“Oh, yes,” the Examiner nodded. “I was going to look her up and vize
her, but I thought perhaps you’d rather.”

“Anything, Examiner, anything I can do. Why, that poor little tyke
wandering around loose—”

The Examiner laughed shortly. “Think of the poor little people he
wanders against.. Uh—call her home first.”

Mayb went to the corner and wheeled the index to the Library
designations, found the number and spoke it into the screen, which lit
up. A moment later its blankness dissolved away like windblown fog, to
show a young woman’s face. She was the true redhead from whom Andi had
his eyes, that was certain.

“You remember me,” said Mayb. “Crèche-Mayb; I’m Andi’s Sector-Guardian.”

“Uh-huh,” said the woman positively.

“Is … is Andi there?”

“Uh-uh,” said the woman negatively.

“Now Beth—are you sure?”

The woman wet her lips. “Sure I’m sure. Isn’t he locked up in your old
crèche? What are you trying to do; trick me again into signing that
paper to have him put in the Quiet Room?”

“Why, Beth! No one ever tried to trick you! We just sent you a report
and our recommendation.”

“I know, I know,” said the woman sullenly. “And if I sign it you’ll put
him away, and if I don’t sign it you’ll appeal it and the Examining
Board’ll back you up. They always do.”

“That’s because we’re very careful. Guardians—”

“Guardians!” snarled Beth. “What kind of Guardians let a four-year-old
child wander out of the Crèche?”

“We are not guardians of the children,” said Mayb with sudden dignity,
“we are Guardians of the Norm.”

“Well, you’ll never get him back!” screamed Beth. “Never, you hear?” The
screen went black.

“Is Andi there?” The Examiner’s eyes twinkled.

“My goodness,” murmured Mayb. “My, my goodness!”

“I wish the predisposal examinations had never passed the Board. If it
weren’t for them, this would never have happened. Why, ten years ago,
we’d have quietly put the little fellow out of the way when we found he
was an Irregular. Now we have to wait three weeks, and poke and prod and
pry to see if the irregularity can possibly turn into a talent. I tell
you, it’ll break the crèches. The mother of every last freak on earth is
going to cry that her little monster is a genius.”

“Oh, if only I hadn’t been careless with that silly old door!” She wrung
her hands.

“Mayb, don’t get worked up. It’ll be all right. I’m sure it will.”

“You’re so nice!” Her voice was shockingly loud in the still room. “Oh
dear! Suppose that woman really does hide him? I mean, suppose she takes
him away? Do you realize what it will be like if that child is allowed
to grow up?”

“Now that is a terrifying thought.”

“Think of it! He already knows what he can do, and he’s only four years
old. Think of those radiations of his grown up man-sized! Suppose he
suddenly appeared, grown up, in the middle of a city. Why, when he
wanted anything, he’d get it. He’d _have_ to get it. And he couldn’t be
stopped! He can’t be reached at all when he does that!”

The Examiner took her arms and gently led her to a mirror on the wall.
“Look at yourself, Mayb. You know, you don’t look at all like the fine,
reliable Guardian you are. Suppose Essie saw you now; you’d never be
able to teach her a thing. I’m head of the Crèche. That’s a privilege
and there’s a certain amount of worrying I have to do to earn it. So let
me do the worrying.”

“You’re so good,” she sobbed. “But—I’m _afraid!_”

“I’m afraid, too,” he agreed soberly. “It’s a bad business. But—don’t
worry. Tell you what. You just go and lie down for a while. Cry yourself
out if you want to—it’ll do you good. And then go on with your work.” He
patted her on the shoulder. “This isn’t the end of the world.”

“It might be,” she gasped, “with creatures like that loose in it,
forcing and pressing and pushing and not to be stopped until they had
what they wanted.”

“Go on now.”

She went, wringing her hands.

It was almost exactly the same time the next morning when Mayb was
summoned from the Assembly Room where she was teaching her children to
sing

“There was a young fellow called Smitti

Who lived in an abnormal city.

His children were bugs

And two-headed slugs,

Oh, dear! What a terrible pity!”

and in the midst of the children’s shrill merriment at Smitti’s comic
predicament, she got the Examiner’s call.

The thin veil of laughter fell from her face and she rose. “Free time!”
she called. The children took the signal as a permission to play; the
hidden watchers behind one-way glass in Observation 1 and 2 bent toward
their panes, Normalcy Reaction charts at their elbows.

Mayb hurried to the Examiner’s office. She found him alone rubbing his
hands. “Well, Mayb! I knew it would be all right.”

“It’s about Andi? You’ve found him? Did you get the police?”

“She got them.” He laughed. “She got them, herself. She just couldn’t
take it—his own mother.”

“Where is he?”

“She’s bringing him … and I’ll bet that’s her, right now.”

The door swung open. An Under-Guardian said, “Library-Beth, Examiner.”

Pushing past the underling, Library-Beth entered. Her flaming hair was
unkempt; her face was white and her eyes wild. In her arms she carried
the limp form of Andi.

“Here he is … _here!_ Take him; I can’t stand it! I thought I could, but
I can’t. I didn’t know what I was doing. I’m a good citizen; I want to
do my duty; I care about the law, and the Norm, and the race. I was
crazy, I guess. I had a thing all made up to tell you, about Andi, about
him surviving, that was it—he can survive better than anyone else on
earth, he can; he can get anything he wants just by wanting it, and no
one can say no to him, not so it makes any difference to him.” It poured
from her in a torrent. She put the limp form down on the settee. “But I
didn’t know it was like this. And he badgered me all night and I
couldn’t sleep, and he ran away in the morning and I couldn’t find him,
and he hated me and when I saw him and ran to him he hated me with his
mind, more and more and more the nearer I got, so that I couldn’t touch
him, and people gathered round and looked at him as if he was a monster,
and he is, and he hated them all, every one of them. And somebody got a
policeman and he threw sleep-dust, and Andi made a hate then that made
everyone cry out and run away, and he hated everyone until he fell
asleep. Now take him. Where is that paper? Where is it?”

“Beth, Beth, don’t. Please don’t. You’ll flurry everyone in the place,
and all the children.”

“Where’s the paper?” she screamed, joltingly. It made Mayb’s ears ring.

The Examiner went for the form, handed two copies and a stylus to Beth.
She signed them, and then collapsed weeping into a chair.

“M-mayb?” The voice was faint.

“He’s waking up. Quick, Mayb. Take him to the Quiet Room!”

Mayb scooped up the child and ran, kicking the door open. Two doors down
the hall was a cubicle exactly like all the other cubicles, except that
it had a black door. And certain concealed equipment. This time she did
not forget to press the door until it was locked. Gray with tension, she
went back to the office. “All right, Examiner.”

The Examiner nodded and stepped swiftly to his button-board. He pressed
a certain button firmly, and a red light appeared.

“Andi!” Beth moaned.

Mayb went to her and put her arms around her. “There now. It’s for the
best. This doesn’t happen much any more. We used to have to do it all
the time. Soon we’ll never have to do it again.”

The Examiner’s expression was bitter, and sad, too. Minority victims
don’t give a damn for statistics, he thought.

Mayb changed her approach. “Beth, we’re getting our norm back.
Think—really think what that means. Humans used to live in complete
confidence that they would be real, hundred per cent humans, with all
the senses and talents and abilities that humans can have. And we’re
getting that back! It’s a pity, a thousand times a pity, but it has to
be done like this. There is no other way!”

Her carefully chosen thoughts could not override the mental pressure
which began to squeeze at them from somewhere—from the Quiet Room.

The light on the board turned yellow.

“Andi—”

“And it’s a good norm,” thought Mayb desperately, “chosen in a congress
of the most wonderful, objective minds we have ever had on earth. Why,
some of them weren’t normal according to the Code they drew up! Think
how brave—”

The agonizing, yammering call blared up, dwindled, flickered a moment,
surged again and was suddenly gone. Through Mayb’s mind trickled the
phrase “in at the death.” She knew it came from the Examiner, who was
standing stiffly, his face registering a harrowing repulsion. He turned
abruptly and threw a lever. The incinerator was fed.

“Don’t cry. It’s better this way,” Mayb radiated to the weeping woman.
“It’s better for him. He never could have been happy, even if men left
him alone. Poor, poor unfinished little thing—imagine the life he’d
have, always able to speak, never to know when he shouted or screamed,
and never being able to hear except with his ears—the only nontelepath
in the whole world!”



FAREWELL TO EDEN


THERE WAS NOTHING in his mind but a warm blackness, or perhaps a very
dark redness. There was a field of it in which he was lying, a sheet of
it over him; the field reached from his back into infinity and the sheet
was as thick as the universe. The darkness was in his eyes and in his
lungs, in his bones. He was part of the darkness, inside and out,
through and through.

He could never know how long it was that he stared at the spot of light
before he realized that it was there. There was no way of telling how
large it was—or how small—how near or how distant. It was vague; it had
no discernible limits, no edges. It grew until it was an oval patch of
clear yellow light in the surrounding darkness.

And at last it was more than a patch of light; it was a hole in the
darkness through which he could see. He saw a mechanical elbow, a
housing from the ends of which two metal arms extended down and into the
impenetrable darkness beside him. The arms were moving rhythmically.

Something was fraying the edges of the oval hole. A translucent border
ate away at the darkness, continuously feeding the patch of clear light,
slowly pushing back the darkness.

And then he began to feel—a surge of sensation, a tickling, prickling
wash of feeling. It had the rhythm of the moving metal arms. It was
pins-and-needles, “my foot’s asleep,” the seed of unconsciousness in the
lungs of a man being gassed. It was comfort and agony; as it grew and as
it faded he wanted to laugh, but when it was at its peak he wanted to
scream.

When at last he could see everything around him he did not know when it
was that the widening hole had become the real world, spreading to his
horizons and beyond, having eaten and eaten at the dark until the last
round speck of black had ceased to exist somewhere behind him, far, far
out in infinity.

The housing above him with its pair of moving arms was only one of many,
one of eight. The sixteen arms reached down to his body. At their ends
were padded packages of something—something which pulsed and tingled—and
the arms were making these packages massage his skin, back and forth,
down and back, over and over, with the same firm pressure, the constant
rhythm. This rhythm paralleled the washes of prickling agony, of
tickling pleasure.

He was lying on his back, naked. His body was free. Either he could not
move it or he did not think of trying. His head was clamped; he felt a
padded band on each side. Suddenly this seemed an affront, an insult. He
moved his head—and was rewarded by a stab of anguish which came, not
from within him, a protest of disused muscles, but from outside, from
the head-clamp.

He did not try to fight it. Lying quite still he felt four thick needles
being withdrawn from the back of his neck, easing a pressure he had not
known was there. When they were gone he began to suffocate.

The light dimmed. The spot of red-blackness reappeared and grew,
spreading fast—much faster than it had left him. Now it was his
horizon—now its edges were an oval before him—now they had enclosed the
housing above his head. With the growth of the darkness a pressure that
became a pain grew into a tearing agony, unbearable. All the pain and
all the fear that had ever been, since the beginning of time, sat on his
chest.

To move it, to get away from it, to stop that deadly agony, he breathed.

When he drew in the first breath the darkness stopped growing. When he
breathed again the oval of light widened and the pain lessened. With yet
another breath, the oval widened again and stopped, and the pain became
even less. With each breath he drove back the darkness. So he breathed
more deeply, a little faster. It became easier to do as the darkness and
the pain fled away from him, to his horizons, back and around behind him
somewhere, dwindled to a patch, a spot, a speck—and ceased to exist.

He laughed then, and moved his head confidently against the clamps. They
broke and fell away—

The inside of his mouth, his tongue and his teeth, were ice-cold. The
rest of his body was warm—too warm on the outside, around a core of
cold. Having laughed and moved his head, he fell asleep, still on his
back, but with his head turned sidewise and a smile on his lips. The
arms, with their pulsing, tingling pads, kept working while he slept.

The veil of sleep had thinned about him and was easily torn by the
breath of laughter which awoke him. He opened his eyes and lay looking,
seeing nothing but the laughter—it was gone, but he could see it: a
rushing of golden steps; veined gold, the veins full of wind-whispers,
for it was not a completely voiced laugh, but partly an alive, joyful
expulsion of unwanted pressure.

At first he thought it was the memory of his own laugh, but on looking,
as it were, at the fingerprints of the laugh—on the particular sensory
impressions the sound had made he found them not in his throat, as if he
himself had made it, but in his ears.

He sat up. Blood roared in his head. Blackness closed, filmed, and
cleared away. He raised his head and saw that the metal arms were folded
up out of the way now, motionless. He was on a complicated bed, over
which was a great transparent hood. This had separated at his right and
a second had slid downward—a section the full length of the bed. It was
an invitation, and though he was conscious of no desire to move, he
reacted to the fact of the open door. He swung his legs out and sat on
the edge, and began to tremble with weakness. He looked around.

There were three lights, two of which he could see, the third one under
a deep shade. One was over his head, one on the wall, the shaded one
between him and the wall, flooding another bed like his with light. On
it the eight pairs of metal arms were moving rhythmically, the pads at
their ends pressing and caressing a woman. It seemed that the pressure
of them went down into the body, coating itself like a paint on the
bones, layer on layer, and he knew, somehow, that these layers were
life, and that when they were thick enough to include the skin the whole
woman would be alive. It must be, he thought (in a way which was not
thought at all) that a part of her must have been alive before the pads
started moving, so that they would have something on which to lay their
paint. She must have been—the alive part—only a wire woman, a line
drawing of living threads, one for each arm, one for each leg, one for
the torso, and a knot for the head.

She was naked. Her body was young and firm. It interested him only as
part of the moving unit, with its padded arms stroking and pressing. He
slid off his bed to the floor, cushioning his fall with knees and hands.
His elbows refused to hold him up and his chin went almost to the floor.
He stayed there for a moment in an equilibrium like that of his first
breath, when he had stopped the darkness but had not yet driven it back.
Then, as he had done before, he threw off the discomfort and
straightened his elbows, his back straining to help. He dragged himself
across the floor and squatted back on his haunches to watch.

To watch, he had to hold his head up higher than normal. It hurt to do
this and he began to tremble again, but for a long, tense period—three
minutes, four perhaps—he watched. The pads moved on her feet, pressing
and stroking; at every third stroke one would sweep around and run up
the sole of her foot, from heel to toe. Another pair tended her calves,
one inside, one outside. The flesh beneath them swelled and hollowed,
swelled and hollowed into complete quiescence while the inside pad made
its special trip—one in every fifth movement—over her kneecap. There was
a pair of pads for each thigh, running from the knee to the hollow of
her groin, and a pair which danced around each other to alternate with
them on the groin then to follow upward to the lower ribs and back.
Another pair swept between her breasts and downward, around to the back
and up to the ribs, where the others had finished; every twelfth stroke
pressed downward from her collarbones to her solar plexus, ignoring the
route around to her back.

He watched in wonder. After a short while his head sagged. He turned it,
and fell asleep again, squatting his cheekbone on his knee and the top
of his head against the side of the woman’s bed.

It was another sound that awoke him the next time. Again he opened his
eyes and looked for it, found it and examined it, though it was gone.
Again he failed to find the imprint of it in him anywhere, and he
understood, too, that it was not from the woman. The laugh—the second
one—had been hers; he knew that. This new sound came from neither of
them.

He raised his head and, doing so, swayed forward. He put out an arm to
keep from falling, and the act further awakened him.

The woman was lying beside him, sprawled brokenly on the floor. She
looked at him and away, looked around her—and back to him again. She lay
as if she had done what he had done—as if she had left her bed and slid
to the floor. But she had not crawled; she lay there beside him, taking
in the room, his bed, herself, and him.

_“Gowry”_

That was the sound, coming again. It did a strange thing to him. He
looked for the source of the sound. He could not find it, but inside
he—recognized something: those syllables meant something of surpassing
importance, but he could not determine what it was—

_“Gowry!”_

He looked for the source of sound and could not find it. He saw that the
woman was looking at him.

_“Gowry!”_

He looked again—and saw it. It was a cone, its wide mouth pointing at
him, its throat a smooth, bland disc of metal. He turned to the woman,
and she was looking at him.

There was a silence. He thought, _When it says “Gowry” I look for the
sound and she looks at me_.

_“Gowry”_

He looked at the cone quickly, and then at the girl. The thing had
spoken and he had looked at it, but she had looked at him.

He said, “Gowry.” His mind reached out, comprehension close—

“Gowry—” the woman faltered.

He nodded. He understood now—he was Gowry.

“Gowry?”

His breath hissed out in response; he drew in more and tried again:
’Yes-s-s,” he said. “Yes.” Then: “Yes, s-s-silf—Tilsa—Tilsa.”

“Tilsa,” said the woman.

They were quiet for a moment, looking at each other. The cone said,
_“Tilsa!”_

She looked at the cone, and he looked at her. He understood immediately
that she was Tilsa. She was Tilsa; he was Gowry.

He put out his hand, and she looked at it. He was not yet strong enough
to hold it up; it fell to the floor beside her, and she stared at it.
Then, swiftly, unexpectedly, sleep overcame her.

For a long while he squatted there, looking at her; then he slept too.

He awoke with an awareness of something within himself. He lay with his
eyes closed, relaxed and receptive. He knew, somehow, that he was strong
now, that if he moved he would not tremble—knew it so well that he did
not have to try to move.

There was a skin full of knowledge within him—a thin skin, stretched
tight by the knowledge it held. The knowledge swirled and swelled,
stretching the skin tighter and more transparent every second. He saw
things inside the skin—

A bearded face. A clutter of rusty, crumbled ruin. A flight of
dart-shaped aircraft, with a sound to them like a blow-torch in a
barrel. The sun shining on rolling green lawns, and, repeatedly, black,
starspangled space in which a cloudy planet floated. The tones of a
voice were there too, circling and weaving amid the swirling knowledge.
The voice meant something to him. Suddenly he knew what it was; it was
the voice which had said, _“Gowry!”_ and _“Tilsa!”_—the voice from the
cone. It was not his voice; it belonged to a thing—a person, someone who
knew him, knew Tilsa, too—everything about them.

“Gowry—”

He opened his eyes. Tilsa was awake, still lying on the floor, looking
at him and smiling. He was on his bed; he must have dragged himself back
to it in the beginnings of sleep.

Suddenly, harshly, he said, “Be quiet.” He hardly realized he had used
the words. Her call had punctured the skin of knowledge within him; it
burst and flooded his mind, a bewildering deluge. He shut Tilsa out with
his voice and eyelids, to be alone with the knowledge again.

The bearded face was—Alan. Alan was Tilsa’s father. He was dead. The
ruined cities were dead. The flights of dart-like aircraft had killed
them. The rolling green lawns were outside his room—was it a room?
Wasn’t it more a machine, some kind of equipment?

The room, or machine, was by itself, away from all the world, carved out
of a forest on the floor of a deep ravine in mesa country. The ravine
was deep, wider at the bottom than at the top, most secret. He
remembered sunlight on the lawns because they used to snatch at it, he
and Tilsa, as it whisked by day after day, for their hurried half hour
of basking as the stripe of sunlight swept fingerlike over their hidden
buildings.

The world was mad. The world was an insane worm, toothed and hating
itself. It broke itself in two, in four, in eight, and each part was
toothed and hating itself and all the other parts. Each part fought,
biting and tearing at itself and the parts of itself in a fury of
immolation. The worm was man, a species destroying itself, a race
destroying itself; a culture, a nation, a city—a single human being
snapping and snarling at his internal selves.

“But you’ll be saved,” Alan had said. “The radioactive dusts will soon
be filtering down to us, even out here. You can imagine what it must be
in the cities. Most of them will die, most of those who don’t will be
sterile, and probably the few who can breed won’t breed true. But you
will, you and Tilsa; you’ll do it—_there_.”

“There” was the cloudy planet, afloat in space. Its clouds were not like
the ones here, its atmosphere held different elements, poisonous to the
animals of Earth. They would have been to Gowry and Tilsa too,
then—before their long sleep, the longest sleep any humans had ever
slept; before the tireless, meticulous workings of their bed-machines.
Their bodies had “stopped” completely, through and through, and then the
cells had been altered, each a little, to rest awhile, and then to be
altered a little more.

Now they were—and were not—Gowry and Tilsa, even as any human, in seven
years has completely replaced every cell of his body and is—and is
not—the same. But the replacement in Gowry and Tilsa was an adjustment
to another environment, even to a slightly different gravity. They were
aliens on Earth now, as a ship is an alien—a manufactured alien—when it
lies completed and as yet dry in the launching ways.

Gowry sat up, swung his legs to the floor, and stood up, stretching. He
felt the good muscles of his back and thighs. He flexed and watched his
fingers. “I remember,” he said simply.

Tilsa shaped her mouth around words: “I—remember—too.”

“Alan, and—the ship, Tilsa—the ship!”

“Yes, it’s up there.” She pointed at the ceiling.

He laughed. “He did it—Alan did it!”

Tilsa rose, feeling air—the new kind of air—in her lungs, feeling the
new way her body obeyed. “Wasn’t there a—something we had to do first?”

“I don’t remember,” he said. “Where’s the ship?”

He cast about him; there was a door with a great stainless-steel bar
across it. He lifted against the bar, and immediately the flat-throated
cone spoke:

_“Have you read the book?”_

“That was it—the thing I couldn’t remember!” Tilsa cried.

The book was on a shelf under the wall light. They pounced on it. Its
opening words were in very simple language, as if written for the
benefit of young children: _You, man, are Gowry. You, woman, are Tilsa.
Read this book. Do not go out of this room until you have read this
book_.

There were tests to be made on themselves, and on the air. There were
solutions to be mixed from the racks of stores they found. There was
much to be learned, but they learned it with increasing ease; they had
learned it all once before, prior to their long sleep. It was an
engrossing study, and they slept twice before they finished it. And then
they opened the door.

Outside was a corridor to another closed door. On the wall hung two
heavy suits, with transparent spherical helmets. Eagerly they climbed
into them, inspected each other’s fastenings. Then they closed the door
behind them and opened the one ahead.

The Earth’s air swirled in. They could see the water vapor in it with
their new eyes; the air seemed turgid, misty. It frightened them a
little, for they knew it was choking poison to them now.

They crossed a narrow gully to a place where two low mounds, rounded and
covered with brush, stood against a rock wall. They looked at the
mounds, appalled.

“They were pylons,” Gowry breathed. “Tall, square pylons—”

“How many years?” asked Tilsa, expecting no answer.

Shrugging off his sudden sadness, Gowry took a tool from his belt and
pressed a stud on the side of it. Blue flame licked out and washed over
the cliff between what was left of the pylons. The deposits of years
crumbled away under the lash of flame, and suddenly a great square
section cracked and toppled toward them. They jumped back as it crashed
and broke. Gowry put away the tool.

Before them was still another door. Gowry pressed it with his gloved
hands, kicked it once with a heavy boot, and it swung open, admitting
them to a shaft. They switched on the lights built into their suits,
their beams shooting forward and upward.

A stainless-steel ladder took them up perhaps fifty feet to a room built
off the side of the shaft. At this point the shaft was roofed by the
banked tubes of the ship, and the room gave access to the ship’s side.
The ship seemed to fit in the shaft like a piston in its cylinder.

They entered the open port and, by means of the controls inside, swung
it shut. There was the distant hum of machinery as the air in the lock
was replaced with the atmosphere they had been readied for. Gowry’s
gloved hand touched Tilsa’s and, suddenly overawed, he grasped it. It
was such a long way they had come—and yet the journey was only
beginning—

A green light flashed on, and the inner door swung open. They stepped
into the ship. “It’s all right,” said Gowry, nodding toward the green
light, and began to remove his suit.

They hung the suits carefully on the clips which had been built for
them. For a moment they clung together, trembling. Then they mounted to
the control room in the ship’s nose, and found another book, a thick
one.

“Remember?”

“Yes,” she nodded. “Fuel, food, water, air; jet tests, star sights,
course computations—We are going to be busy.”

Gowry looked around the compact control room with learning, re-learning
eyes. “Let’s get to it,” he said.

Two days later they had learned their ship and themselves, and had
tested themselves and their ship. With every small step of progress they
felt an increasing awe of Alan, and of the thing he had built. They
remembered his words: _“Mankind is accursed everywhere. It must start
anew, in a place which it has not burned over and ruined.”_

His words awed them, but even more the nature of his work awed them, for
he did it knowing that he would never see the result, for a purpose
transcending the two lives he was saving—saving and recreating. He had
done it as an act of faith in a creature which had violated every faith
ever put in it.…

A rock-fall had damaged the great winch designed to raise the ship up
through its tunnel until it could break through the surface of the mesa
above them. They worked shoulder to shoulder to repair it, and at last
had their craft with its nose to the outer air. They took their star
sights, and found that in just four days they could blast off, hurl
themselves free of Earth’s gravity, and run out to intersect the orbit
of their new world.

They used the time to examine a tired planet and its graves, and the
horrors that were worse than graves—mankind’s living dead. With a
tight-beam scanner they ranged the surface, throwing on a screen
pictures of places near them, and of places far away.

“It’s a sunny place,” Tilsa observed, watching the screen. It seemed
they had seen so little of the sun; they had been very young when they
first came to the mesa.

“Look!” tore from Gowry’s throat.

They saw a cliff, cave openings. Creatures squatted around a fire at the
foot of the cliff. They were short and broad, their torsos as long and
thick as Gowry’s, but their legs seeming to have no thighs—short, stiff,
thick, ending in enormous, flat, toeless feet. Some of them moved about
slowly, their feet in a grotesque, shuffling dance; one or two,
approaching faster from a distance, vaulted along on their knuckles,
making crutches of their arms.

Burning and sputtering on the coals of the fire was—one of their own.
They tore off handfuls of the hot, half-raw meat, gnawing at it with
yellow fangs.

Gowry’s throat was thick with nausea. “Humanity’s children,” he
whispered, and spun the control to blank the screen. “What the world
must have gone through while we slept,” he mused, “to have such things
fit to survive here.”

“Look some more,” said Tilsa. Her face was rapt, half-hypnotized with
revulsion. “We should know—we should find out everything we can—”

Reluctantly Gowry turned to the controls again, scanning the Earth. He
stopped briefly here and there. A ruined, grave-quiet city. A road,
beautiful in its narrowing course, but with its surface crumbled and
overgrown. Deserts where crawling giant weeds had choked out all life,
including their own. Then came the picture they were never to forget.

“Tilsa—a different kind!”

They saw a house, seemingly of metal, in rolling country near wooded
mountains. It was hexagonal, quite low, with a shining, peaked roof.
There were creatures near it—two of them.

They were tall, slender, blue-hued, with long heads and curved, muscular
tails. They ran out into the sun in great, graceful leaps. They stopped,
hand in hand, brought their free hands to touch too, and their tails
curved up over their heads until they touched each other. They stood
there in this curious contact for a long moment.

“Why—how beautiful!” cried Tilsa.

Then, from the foot of the meadow in which they stood, like a spilling
over of some foul container, came a mass of the short-legged humanoids.
The crutch-like sweep of their long arms advanced them with terrifying
speed as they crowded up the slope—

“Look out! Run!” Gowry shouted at the screen, uselessly.

The blue creatures stood, oblivious of their danger, until the leaders
of the horde were on them. They did not appear to resist. There was a
swirl of motion, a piling up of the ravening humanoids, and it was over.
One by one, they crept away from the snarling mob, bearing grisly blue
fragments which they tore to bits with their teeth—and spat out.

“No more,” Tilsa said faintly. “No more—”

Gowry turned off the set and sank down beside her. “What for?” he said,
as if to himself. “What did they do it for?”

“They saw a difference,” she said, her eyes agonized. “Mankind has
always pulled down and destroyed anything that is different. Even if the
differences are slight, they will be sought out. Alan used to say that
if there was just one human left on earth he would kill himself because
of the differences he would find in his own thought.”

“It won’t be that way with us,” he said quietly.

“No, it can’t be—it can’t.”

Their time came. The automatic machinery clicked and hummed and purred
about its many tasks. Gowry fed a punched card into the course
integrator and switched it on; the ship would blast off at the precise
instant for which it was set.

They strapped themselves into the acceleration chairs, side by side.
Moving his hand spiderwise against the restraining fabric, Gowry edged
it over until it touched Tilsa’s. To his surprise, she pulled away.

“Don’t,” she said. “You make me think of those blue ones—”

The jets thundered and they hurtled away; the great shaft fell in on
itself under the battering thrust of the flames.

They both blacked out. When Gowry came to he was aware first of his
laboring heart and the great pressure which lay upon him. At seven
gravities, his limbs weighed hundreds of pounds; his eyeballs ached and
his heart all but groaned its protest. He forced his eyelids open and
looked ahead, and his heart began to beat more strongly,
exultantly—before him was the majesty of interstellar space, a bejeweled
purple curtain.

Eight and a half hours later the acceleration cut down to a more
comfortable two and a third gravities. Breathing was easier, and they
could talk. But they said little, instead lying in the chairs, drinking
in the wonder before them.

The days fled, marked only by the clock, by hunger and sleep. Once Tilsa
spoke of the blue beings: “I wish I had never seen them. I wish I didn’t
know about the part of humanity that kills for nothing.”

“Think of this ship,” he told her, “of that part of humanity that made
Alan do this work.”

“Waste,” she murmured. “That’s the sin of it—the waste. Oh, the songs
men have sung, the fine and beautiful things written and painted and
built—all come to ruination—” She wept. “Oh, the waste—”

“Humanity’s trademark,” he said bitterly. “Stamped, sooner or later, on
all of man’s works.”

She stroked the edge of the instrument panel. “Not all,” she pleaded;
“not all—”

They made their planetfall with Gowry at the manual controls. Round and
round the cloudy globe they went, the braking rockets roaring, until at
last the outer skin of the ship trembled to a high screaming—atmosphere.
They plunged through it and out again, letting it check their speed but
not taking enough to burn them, meteor-like. He threw out blast after
blast from the forward jets and they entered the atmosphere again, lost
it, took it, held it—and began to spiral in.

He kicked in the six gyro-controlled supporting jets, which blasted down
and outward. They settled, until they were in the white sea of cloud
around the planet. Blinded by it, they turned on the scanner and coupled
the supporting jets to the radar altimeter. They passed a mountain
range, and another, and a long series of foothills, and a great sea. And
at last, in the radarscope, they saw a coast.

Gowry slid the ship in toward it. He touched the water; the ship
porpoised with a grinding wrench, settled and skipped again, rode the
surface until it slowed enough to displace some of its weight. Huge
sheets of spray whipped out, and the ship floated. Gowry kicked it
forward with the jets, driving it confidently up onto the beach, where
it stopped and rolled a little to the right, to lie still like some
great sea animal.

“Beautifully done, darling!”

“Thanks,” he said proudly. “It wasn’t anything you could work up to—had
to be done right the first time. Are you running the atmosphere tests?”

“All done, while you were piloting in.” She held up a phial of purple
fluid. “It reacts perfectly—and Alan’s gravity, magnetic-density, and
radio-active indices all check. Let’s go out!” she caroled.

“The suits—”

“Damn the suits, darling—we’re _home!_”

Laughing, they ran to the airlock, waited impatiently for the outside
door to open. As it rolled back, Gowry caught her wrist.

“No, you don’t,” he said, checking her as she was about to leap. “We go
into Our House like this,” and he swept her into his arms and stepped
through the port, dropping easily to the ground beneath.

“Put me down!” she commanded. “I want to run!”

He let her go and she was off like a deer, into the mist. Shouting
delightedly, he sprinted after her. He caught her on a knoll, a little
hummocky island of ground in the surrounding mist. He pressed her to
him, capturing her laughing mouth with his lips.…

There was something near them in the fog. He raised his head, holding
her tight, and saw it settle down through the air a little way
off—something big, angular, metallic—

_A house—a hexagonal house_, he wondered mutely; _like the blue people’s
house—but this is a ship—and_ their _house was a ship, then; and they—_

Out of the hexagonal ship tumbled scores of them: blue people—but blue
people dwarfed and transformed, with knotty little tails and shambling
limbs, without the leaping grace, their beauty warped and gone—

It was over in seconds. One by one the blue mutants crawled away,
spitting out the torn, bloody fragments.



ONE FOOT AND THE GRAVE


I WAS OUT in Fulgey Wood trying to find out what had happened to my
foot, and I all but walked on her. Claire, I mean. Not Luana. You
wouldn’t catch Luana rolled up in a nylon sleeping bag, a moonbeam
bright on her face.

Her face gleamed up like a jewel sunk deep in a crystal spring. I stood
looking at it, not moving, not even breathing, hoping that she would not
wake. I’d found that horror of a skull ten minutes ago and I’d much
rather she didn’t see it.

She stirred. I stepped back and sideward into a bear-trap. The steel
jaws were cushioned by my heavy boot; they sliced through from instep to
heel, but did not quite meet. All the same, it was a noise in the
soughing silences of the wood, and Claire’s eyes opened. She studied the
moon wonderingly for a moment because, I presume, her face was turned to
it. Then she seemed to recall where she was. She sat up and glanced
about. Her gaze swept over me twice as I stood there stiff and straight,
trying to look like a beech. Or a birch. I must be of the wrong family.
She saw me.

“Thad …” She sat up and knuckled her eyes. Claire has a deep voice, and
meticulous. She peered. “It—_is_ Thad?”

“Most of me. Hi.”

“Hi.” She moved her mouth, chewing, apparently, the end of sleepiness.
She swallowed it and said. “You’ve been looking for me.”

“For years,” I said gallantly. That might have been true. At the moment,
however, I was in pursuit of my foot, and possibly some peace and quiet.
I hadn’t counted on this at all.

“Well, Lochinvar, why don’t you sweep me into your arms?”

“I’ve told you before. You’re everything in the world I need, but you
don’t strike sparks. Go on back to bed.”

She shook her hair, forward, out and down, and then breathtakingly back.
She had masses of it. In the moonlight it was blue-gray, an obedient
cloud. “You don’t seem surprised to find me out here.”

“I’m not. The last thing I said to you in town was to sit tight, stay
where you were, and let me handle this. The fact that you are here
therefore does not surprise me.”

“You know,” she said, putting one elbow on one knee, one chin in one
palm, and twinkling, “you say ‘therefore’ prettier than anyone else I
ever met. Why don’t you come over here and talk to me? Are you standing
in a bear-trap?”

She was wearing a one-piece sunsuit. It was backless and side-less and
the summer flying suit, hanging on the bush at her head, plus the light
nylon sleeping bag, were obviously everything in the world she had with
her. About the bear-trap I said, “Well, yes.”

She laughed gaily, and lay back. Her hair spread and spilled; she
burrowed into it with the back of her head. She pulled the sleeping bag
tight up around her throat and said, “All right, silly. Stand there if
you want to. It’s a big boudoir.”

I said nothing. I tugged cautiously at the trap, moving just my leg. The
boot all but parted; the moon gleamed on the steel jaws, now only an
inch apart and closing slowly. I stopped pulling. I hoped she would go
back to sleep. I hoped the trap wouldn’t clank together when it finally
went all the way through. I stood still. There was sweat on my mouth.

“You still there?”

“Yup,” I said.

She sat up again. “Thad, this is stupid! _Do_ something! Go away, or
talk to me or something, but don’t just _stand_ there!”

“Why don’t you just go on to sleep and let me worry about what I do? I’m
not in your way. I won’t touch you.”

“That I don’t doubt,” she said acidly. “Go away.” She thumped down,
turned away, turned back and sat up, peering. “I just thought … maybe
you _can’t …_” She flung out of the bag and stood up, slim in the
moonlight. I could see her toenails gleam as she stepped on the fabric.
Her right toenails, I mean. Her left foot wasn’t a foot. It was a cloven
hoof, hairy-fetlocked, sharp and heavy. She was as unselfconscious about
it as she was of the casual coverage her sunsuit afforded her. She came
to me, limping slightly.

“Go on back to—let me al—oh for Pete’s sake, Claire, I’m perfectly—”

She breathed a wordless, sighing syllable, all horror and pity. “Thad,”
she cried. “Your—your _foot!_”

“I didn’t want you to know.”

“How could you just _stand_ there with that—that—Oh!” She knelt, reached
toward my trapped foot, recoiled before she touched it and stayed there
looking up at me with her eyes bright in the silver light, silver
tear-streaks on her face like lode-veinings. “What shall I _do?_”

I sighed. “Keep your fingers away from the trap.” I leaned back and
pulled. The macerated leather of my high-laced hunting boot held, gave,
held—and then the jaws whanged together, close-meshed. I fell back
against a birch-trunk, banging my head painfully. Claire, seeing almost
the entire foot dangling under the arch of the trap’s jaws, started a
shriek, then jammed it back into her mouth with her whole hand. I
grunted.

“Oh,” she said, “you poor _darling!_ Does it hurt?” she added inanely.

“No,” I said, rubbing my skull. “It was just my head …”

“But your foot! Your poor foot!”

I began unlacing what was left of the boot. “Don’t bother your pretty
little head about it,” I said. I pulled the boot-wings aside and slipped
my leg out of boot and woolen stocking together. She looked, and sat
down plump! before me, her jaw swinging slackly. “Shut it,” I said
conversationally. “You really looked beautiful a while back. Now you
look silly.”

She pointed to my hoof. It was larger than hers, and shaggier. “Oh,
Thad! I didn’t know … how long?”

“About three weeks. Damn it, Claire, I didn’t want you to know.”

“You should have told me. You should have told me the second it
started.”

“Why? You had enough on your mind. You’d already been through all the
treatment that anyone could figure out, and I was in on all of it. So
when it happened to me, I didn’t see the sense in making a federal case
out of it.” I shrugged. “If Dr. Ponder can’t cure this no one can. And
he can’t. Therefore—”

Through her shock, she giggled.

“Therefore,” I continued, “there was nothing left for me to do but try
to find out what had happened, by myself.” I saw her lower lip push out
before she dropped her face and hid it. “What’s the matter?” I asked.

“I—kind of thought you were trying to help just me.”

Claire can switch from giggles to tears, from shock to laughter to
horror to fright, faster than anyone I ever met. It goes all the way
down too. I said, “Don’t kid yourself. I don’t do things for people.”

“Well,” she said in a very small voice, “that’s what I thought, for a
while anyway.”

“You better get back in that sleeping bag. You’ll catch cold,” I said.

She rose and crept obediently back to the sleeping bag. Once into it,
she said, “Well, you’ll care if I catch cold.”

I went and hunkered down beside her. “Well sure. I might catch it.”

“You wouldn’t get that close!”

“Oh, I don’t know. I read somewhere that a sneeze can travel thirty
feet.”

“I hate you.”

“Because I sneaked out behind your back and got a fancy foot just like
yours?”

“Oh, Thad! How can you joke about it?”

I sat back and lifted my hoof, regarding it thoughtfully. I had found it
possible to spread the two halves and relax suddenly. They made a nice
loud click. I did this a couple of times. “I’d rather joke about it. How
frantic can you get?”

“Thad, Thad … It’s my fault, it is, it is!”

“Uh-huh. That’s what I get for playing footsie with you in road-houses.
You’re contagious, that’s what.”

“You’re no comfort.”

“I don’t comfort stupid people. This isn’t your fault, and you’re being
stupid when you talk like that. Does yours itch?”

“Not any more.”

“Mine does.” I clicked my hoof some more. It felt good. “What gave you
the idea of coming out here?”

“Well,” she said shyly, “after you said you’d track this thing down for
me, but wouldn’t say how, I thought it all out from the very beginning.
This crazy trouble, whatever it is, started out here; I mean, it
developed after I came out here that time. So I figured that this is
where you’d be.”

“But why come?”

“I didn’t know what you’d get into here. I thought you might—might need
me.”

“Like a hole in the head,” I said bluntly.

“And I thought you were doing it just for me. I didn’t know you had a
foot like that too.” Her voice was very small.

“So now you know. And you’re sorry you came. And first thing in the
morning you’ll hightail it straight back to town where you belong.”

“Oh no! Not now. Not when I know we’re in this together. I like being in
something together with you, Thad.”

I sighed. “Why does my luck run like this? If I got all hog-wild and
feverish about you, you’d turn around and get short of breath over some
other joker. Everybody loves somebody—else.”

“You’re thinking about Luana,” she said with accuracy. Luana was Dr.
Ponder’s typist. She had taut coral pneumatic lips, a cleft chin, and a
tear-stained voice like that of an English horn in the lower register.
She had other assets and I was quite taken with both of them.

“If I were as honest about my feelings as you are about yours,” I said,
“and as loud-mouthed, I’d only hurt your feelings. Let’s talk about our
feet.”

“All right,” she said submissively. “Thad …”

“Mm?”

“What did you mean when you said you’d seen me be beautiful?”

“Oh, for Pete’s sake! Skip it, will you? What has that to do with feet?”

“Well … Nothing, I guess.” She sounded so forlorn that, before I could
check myself, I reached out and patted her shoulder. “I’m sorry, Claire.
I shouldn’t brutalize you, I guess. But it’s better than stringing you
along.”

She held my hand for a moment against her cheek. “I s’pose it is,” she
said softly. “You’re so good … so good, and—so sensible.”

“So tired. Give me back my hand. Now; let’s put all this fantastic
business together and see what comes out. You start. Right from the
beginning, now; somewhere, somehow, there’s got to be an answer to all
this. I know we’ve been over it and over it, but maybe this time
something will make sense. You start.”

She lay back, put her hands behind her head, and looked at the moon. She
had to turn her head for this, because the moon was sinking, and there
were knife-edges of light among the cords of her throat. “I still say it
was the night I met you. Oh, don’t worry; I won’t get off on that
again … but it was. You were just a face among faces to me then. A nice
face, but—anyway, it was the Medusa Club meeting, the night we got
talking about magic”

“I’ll never forget that night,” I said. “What a collection of neurotics!
Saving your presence, ma’am.”

“That’s the only purpose of the club—to find those things which frighten
neurotics and stare them down, and to keep on doing it until somebody
drops dead. Score to date: umpteen-odd dead boogie-men, no dead people.
Hence the discussion of magic that night.”

“That makes sense. And I remember Ponder’s point that we are not as far
removed from the days of the witches and wizards as we like to think. We
knock on wood; we slip bits of wedding-cake under our pillows; we hook
fingers with each other when we suddenly say the same thing together,
and so on and on. And he said that perhaps this subconscious clinging to
ritual was not because of a lingering childishness but because the
original magic forces were still in operation!”

“That was it,” said Claire. “And a fine flurry of snorts he got for
that!”

“Yup. Especially from you. I still don’t understand why you got so
steamed up.”

“I _hate_ that kind of talk!” she said vociferously. “But I hated it
especially hearing it from Dr. Ponder. Ever since I’ve known him he’s
been so reasonable, so logical, so—well, so wonderful—”

I grinned. “I’m jealous”

“Are you, Thad? Are you really?” she said eagerly; then, “No. You’re
laughing at me, you heel … anyway, I couldn’t stand hearing that kind of
poppycock from him.”

I put out my cloven hoof and snapped it in front of her nose. “What do
you think now?”

“I don’t know what to think …” she whispered, and then, with one of her
startling switches of mood, continued in a normal voice, “so the next
day I decided to track down some of the old superstitions for myself.
Heaven knows this part of the country is full of them. The Indians left
a lot, and then the Dutch and the French and the Spanish. There’s
something about these hills that breeds such things.”

I laughed. “Sounds like Lovecraft.”

“Sounds like Charles Fort, too!” she snapped. “Some day you’ll learn
that you can’t laugh at one and admire the other. Where was I?”

“In the woods.”

“Oh. Well, the most persistent superstition in these parts is the old
legend of the Camel’s Grave. I came out here to find it.”

I scrabbled up some of the soft earth to make a pit for my elbow and a
hummock for my armpit. I lay on my side, propped up my head with my
hand, and was comfortable. “Just run off that legend again, once over
lightly.”

She closed her eyes. “Somewhere in this no-good country—no one’s ever
been able to farm it, and there’s too much jimson weed and nightshade
for grazing—there’s supposed to be a little hollow called Forbidden
Valley. At the north end of it they say there’s a grave with something
funny about it. There’s no headstone. Just a skull. Some say a man was
buried there up to his neck and left to die.”

“The Amazon Indians have a stunt like that. But they pick an anthill for
the job. Cut off the feller’s eyelids first. After that, the potato
race, ducking for apples and ice cream is served in the main tent.”

“A picnic,” she agreed, shuddering. “But there was never anything like
that among the local Indians here. Besides, we don’t run to that kind of
ant either. Anyway, this skull is chained, so the story goes, with a
link through the edge of the eye-socket. It’s supposed to be a magician
buried there. Thing is, the legend is that he isn’t dead. He’ll live
forever and be chained forever. Nothing can help him. But he doesn’t
know it. So if anyone wanders too close, he’ll capture whoever it is and
put’ em to work trying to dig him out. The old tales keep coming
out—kids who had wandered out here and disappeared, the old woman who
went out of her head after she got back to town, the half-witted boy who
mumbled something about the skull that talked to him out of the ground.
You know.”

“Why do they call it the Camel’s Grave?”

“_I_ don’t know. Some say the magician was an Egyptian who used to ride
a camel around. Some say it comes from some Indian name. The nearest I
can find in the library to ‘Camel’ is ‘ko-mai’ which means the green
stick they used to spit meat over a fire. But that’s Winnebago, and
there were no Winnebagos around here.”

“Wait. You mean there were Indian legends about this?”

“Oh, sure. I dug those out. There are all sorts of stories. Some of them
are shocking—I mean in a nice way.” She giggled. “But they all have one
thing in common—the imprisoned magician, who, by the way, was old, old
as the hills. He wasn’t an Indian either. They made that quite clear.
And always Camel, or ‘Grave of the Camel.’ Just to mix that up even more
for you, I looked up ‘camel’ in the dictionary and found out that the
word is derived from ‘Djemal,’ which is Arabic, or ‘Gamal,’ which is
Hebrew.”

“Fine,” I said bitterly. “Much progress. So go on with your little trip
out here.”

“That first time? Oh, nothing happened. I brought some chow and stayed
out here about four days at the full moon, which is supposed to be the
time when the Forbidden Valley can be found. I didn’t see a soul but old
Goo-goo running his traps. No one pays attention to Goo-goo.”

“Not even people who step into one of his bear-traps? You’re lucky you
didn’t bed down in it.”

“Oh, don’t blame him, Thad! He’s a sweet old man, really. He’s deaf and
dumb, you know. He keeps out of people’s way as much as he can. Comes in
with a few skins every now and then and lives off the land. He could
tell us a thing or two about Forbidden Valley if he could talk. But he
can’t even write. They say he doesn’t mind the haunted hills because no
one ever found a way to tell him about them. What he doesn’t know can’t
hurt him. As for the trap, he put it where he thought it might do him
some good, among the birches where bears sometimes come to hunt for bugs
under the bark. Practically no one ever comes out here. When they do,
it’s their lookout, not Goo-goo’s.”

“Hey.” I straightened up. “How can you be so casual about bunking out
here with a wildcat or two and an occasional bear wandering around?
There are copperheads too, to say nothing of a trapper who must be
lonesome, to put it mildly.”

“Why I—” She paused, wonderingly. “I never thought about it, I guess.
Thad—nothing ever hurt me. I mean it. No dog ever bit me, no cat ever
scratched me. I don’t seem to be very tempting to mosquitoes. Once when
I was a little girl a bull gored a hired man who was walking across a
field with me. The bull bellowed and jumped and capered all around me,
but he didn’t touch me. I’ve never even been stung by a bee.”

“You don’t say.” I considered her thoughtfully. “I begin to see why I
asked you out for a beer the night of the meeting.”

“Why, Thad?”

“Now don’t get ideas. I just pegged you as being—different, that’s all.
Not better—different. You puzzled me. I’ve been a lot of places, Claire.
Tropics. At sea. Construction jobs. I’ve met a lot of people, but no one
like you.”

“That again,” she snorted. “People are always telling me that, one way
or another. And what’s it get me? The very first time I fall for a big
dead-pan stranger, he doesn’t know I’m alive. All large muscles and bad
taste.”

“What do you mean bad taste?”

“Luana.”

“Now look. I won’t bandy her about. Stay off the subject, see?”

Surprisingly, she laughed. “Temper—temper,” she cautioned. “My, you roar
purty. But back to the subject at hand. I was out here four days and
nights, wandering around, trying to find the Forbidden Valley. Once I
thought I had it. It was about midnight. The moon was bright, like
tonight. I was near here somewhere. There was a little swag in the
ground with a high bluff at one end. I went up to it. I tripped over
something. I don’t know what it was. I almost _never_ fall over things
but I sure did that time. I fell right on top of some little animal. I
hope I didn’t hurt it. I don’t know what it was. It wriggled out from
under me and whizzed away fast as a deer-fly. I never saw anything move
so fast; a blur and it was gone. It was about as big as a chipmunk, but
longer—oh, three times as long. I got a vague impression of pointed ears
and the funniest broad, flat tail. It was like nothing I’ve ever seen.”

“I thought nothing happened in those four days.”

“Well—that couldn’t be important. Oh; I see what you mean. _Anything_
might be important. All right. Now—what else?”

“Goo-goo.”

“Oh. I saw him once. Twice. The first time he was setting a whip-snare
in a clearing in the woods. I waved at him and smiled and he nodded and
gurgled the way he does and smiled back. The second time I don’t think
he saw me. He was out in the open. Early morning. He was tramping round
and round in a circle in the grass. Then he stopped and faced the sun.
He did something with his knife. Held it out, sort of, and touched
himself on the shoulders and chin with it. I don’t remember very
clearly. It didn’t last long. And that’s all.”

“Hmp.” I plucked some grass and skinned it with my front teeth, to get
the juice. “Then you came back to town and your foot went haywire.”

“Yes. It only took about six days to get the way it is. It was awful at
first. The toes gathered, and the whole foot began to get pointed. It
was longer at first. I mean, my foot straightened out like a ballet
dancer’s and I couldn’t get my heel down. Then the whole thing thickened
up and grew shorter, and the tip turned black and hardened and—”

I interrupted, “I know, I know. Had one once myself. Now, how many
people did you tell about it?”

“Oh, nobody. I mean, Dr. Ponder, of course, and then you. Dr. Ponder was
so—so—”

“Wonderful,” I submitted.

“Shut up. So _understanding_, I mean.”

“That’s an odd word to use.”

“Is it? Anyway, he said I had a—a—”

“Chitinous podomorphia.”

“Yes. How did you know?”

“You told me, right after he told you. Only _I_ remembered it. Mine
began shortly afterward, and I remembered it again.” I spit out my grass
and selected another stem. “A brilliant diagnosis.”

“Thad … you—sometimes you say things in a way I don’t understand.”

“Do I?” In the growing predawn darkness, I could feel her sharp swift
gaze on me. I said, “Go on. He treated the foot?”

“He bound it. It was very clever. As the foot changed shape from day to
day he changed the bandages, so that it never looked any worse than a
slightly sprained ankle. He seemed to know all about the trouble. He
predicted the course of the trouble as it developed, and told me that it
would go just so far and stop, and he kept me from getting frightened,
and explained why I should keep it a secret.”

“What did he say?

“He harked back to the meeting, and the things that had been said.
Especially about the readiness of people to believe in so-called
mystical events. He said there was enough residual superstition in town
to make life miserable for a girl with a cloven hoof. Especially for
me.”

“Why you especially?”

“Didn’t I ever tell you? I thought I had … See, my mother and
father … they were engaged. I mean, they were each engaged to someone
else. Dad came from Scoville way. That’s eight miles or more on the
other side of these woods. He didn’t know Mother at all. He took to
coming out here at night. He didn’t know why. He couldn’t help it. And
Mother—she was about eighteen at the time—Mother jumped up from the
dinner table one night and ran. She just _ran_ out here. It’s a long
way. Granddad tried to follow her, but she ran like a deer. When he
finally came huffing and puffing into the wood—it was a white night like
tonight—and stopped to get his breath back, he heard a man calling,
‘Jessica! Jessica!’ That was Mother’s name. Granddad followed the sound.
It was out here in the open somewhere. Granddad climbed a rise and
looked down and saw this young man standing with his arms out, calling
and calling, turning every which way as he called. Granddad was going to
yell at him but then he saw Mother. She was going down the slope ahead
of him, walking slowly—he used to say ‘as if the meadow was a grand
marble stair, and she in a gold dress, for all she was tattered with
thorns.’

“The two of them stopped two yards apart and stood there staring at one
another for longer than it took Granddad to get to them. He had to yell
twice or three times before she even knew he was there. She kept her
eyes on the young man’s face and just said, ‘Yes, Father.’ And Granddad
bellowed at her to come home. She stepped to the young man—that was my
dad—and she put a hand on his arm and said, ‘He’ll come too.’ Granddad
said, ‘The hell he will!’ He wouldn’t talk to my dad, he was so upset
and angry. ‘I don’t even know his name!’ and Mother said quietly, ‘No
more do I. You’d better ask him, Father.’ And that was how it was.”

I sat up and crossed my legs, entranced. “You mean that was the first
time they saw each other?”

She nodded, though by now I could barely see her, for the moon was gone
and only its cold loom stood in the sky over the western hills. “The
very first time,” she said. “And they were together every minute they
could be after that. They were married right away.”

“How?”

She shifted uncomfortably as I asked it, and said, “By a judge. It
wasn’t a church wedding. It was quicker. People talked. They still talk.
They have lots of ideas about what went on out here, but what I’m
telling you is the truth. Anyway, Granddad got used to the idea very
soon, though he was against it at first. Even the talk didn’t bother
him; those two lived in a world of their own. Nothing touched them. Dad
made wood-carvings—clock cases and newel-figurines and so on, and Mother
was with him almost every minute. Granddad used to say if you pinched
the one, the other’d say ‘Ouch.’ He said nobody could stay mad in that
house; he knew because he tried. So … it didn’t matter what people
said.” She paused, and I just waited. Later, questions.

Presently she said sleepily, “And it _doesn’t_ matter. My mother and dad
are like that now. They always will be. Nothing can change what you
remember.”

I waited again. This was a long time. Finally I asked, gently, “Where
are they?”

“They died.”

She slept. Somehow the moon had moved around to the east again. No: it
wasn’t the moon. It was a cloudless dawn, a dilution; light staining the
hem of the sky. I sank back with my elbow in the hole I had dug and my
armpit on the me-shaped hummock, and looked at the sleeping girl. I knew
now what the single thing was that made her different. She was as
changeable as bubble-colors; she felt, immediately and noticeably, all
the emotions except one. And that was her difference. She was absolutely
fearless.

That story … so simply told, and then, “They died.”

Cloven hooves.

“They died.” People like that … for a time I was angrier at such a death
than I was, even, at the ugly excrescence that was once a foot. Dr.
Ponder seemed to know a lot about these things. “Chitinous podomorphia.”
Oh, fine. That meant, “change of a foot into chitin—hoof, horn, and
fingernail material.” I hadn’t gone to Ponder. I couldn’t really say
why. Maybe Luana was the reason for that. Somehow I couldn’t take the
idea of Luana writing up my case history on her neat file-cards. And
there was no other doctor in town. Here was Claire with the same
trouble, and I’d been in on that from the word go. I just did for my
foot what Ponder had done for Claire’s, and hoped that Luana would never
hear about it. What girl would give a tumble to a man with a cloven
hoof?

The sun poked a flaming forehead over the wall of hills. By its light I
studied Claire’s relaxed face. She was not beautiful, by any means. She
had a round, pleasant face. When she laughed, a transverse crease
appeared under her nose; she was the only human being with that
particular upper lip that I had ever liked. Her lashes were thick but
not long, and now, with her eyes closed, half the beauty she had was
cloaked, for she had the most brilliant eyes I had ever seen. Her jaw
was round and small, slightly cleft. She missed being square and stocky
by fractional proportions.

“I must be out of my mind,” I muttered. Claire was a wonderful
person … a wonderful person. Genuine, honest, full of high humor, and,
for me, no fireworks.

But Luana, the beautiful secretary of Dr. Ponder, now, that was a
different story. She had an odd, triangular face and a skin that seemed
lit softly from underneath. Her cheeks were a brighter rose than the
sides of her neck but you couldn’t tell just where the gradations began.
Her hair was the extremely dark but vivid red of black-iron in a forge
just beginning to heat. Her hands were so delicate and smooth you’d
think they’d break on a typewriter, and her canine teeth were a shade
too long, so that her head looked like a flower with fangs. She had one
expression—complete composure. Her unshakable poise made me grind my
teeth; some way, somehow, I wanted it broken. I don’t think she had
brain-one and I didn’t care; it wasn’t her brains I was after. Her face
floated before me on the flames of the fireworks she generated in me,
and there wasn’t a thing in the world I could do about it. When I was in
town I’d date her, when I could. On the dates we didn’t talk. She danced
sedately and watched movies attentively and ate pineapple frappés with
delicacy and thoroughness, and I’d just sit there and bask, and count
the seconds until, after I walked her to her gate, she closed it between
us and leaned across for a demure kiss. Her lips were cool, smooth, and
taut. Pneumatic. Then I’d stride away snarling at myself. “You’re a
bumpkin,” I’d say. “You’re all feet and Adam’s apple.” I’d tell myself I
had a hole in the head. I called myself forty kinds of a fool. “There’s
no future in it,” I’d say. I’d tell myself, “You know that ten years
from now, when the bloom is off, she’ll look like something the cat
dragged in, her and her teeth.” And thinking about the teeth would make
me visualize those lips again, and—so cool!

Often, those nights, I’d run into Claire, who just happened to be in
Callow’s Friendly Drug and Meat Market buying a whodunit, and we’d get a
soda or something and talk. Those were the talks where everything came
out. I never got so thick with anyone so fast. Talking to Claire is like
talking to yourself. And she told me, somehow or other, about the foot,
right from the first. She didn’t tell anyone else. Except Dr. Ponder, of
course.…

What a strange person she was! It was inconceivable that she should not
have questioned Dr. Ponder more about her foot—yet she had not. His
prognosis was that the condition would stop at her ankle, and may or may
not be permanent, and, for her, that was that. In the same situation
anyone else on Earth would be scrambling around from specialist to
specialist between trips to a wailing wall. Not Claire. She accepted it
and was not afraid.

A patch of sun the size of a kitten crept up the edge of her sleeping
bag and nestled in her hair. After a pause to warm and brighten itself,
it thrust a golden pseudopod around the curve of her cheek and touched
her eyelid. She stirred, smiled briefly at what must have been a most
tender dream, and woke.

“Good morning.”

She looked at me mistily, and smiled a different smile. “I fell asleep.”

“You did. Come on—stir your stumps. I want to show you something that
I’ve discovered.”

She stretched and yawned. “I was talking to you and I fell asleep right
in the middle of it. I’m sorry.”

“I’m glad. You got your beauty sleep.” Her face softened, so I added,
“You need it.”

“You’re so sweet, Thad,” she said. “Much sweeter than gall. ’Bout like
vinegar, when you try hard.” She slid out of the sleeping bag and idly
scratched her hairy ankle. “If I had to choose between this thing with
you, and my ordinary old foot without you, I think I’d keep the hoof.
How do you make that noise with it?”

I showed her. She tried it. All she could get was a muffled pop, like
fingers snapping with gloves on. She laughed and said I was a genius,
and rose and climbed into her flying suit. She had half-length boots,
padded inside to support her hoof. Once they were on, no one could have
guessed. While she was about these small chores, and others concerning
folding and stowing the sleeping bag and breaking out some C and K
rations, I rescued my amputated shoe from the bear-trap and, by cutting
and piecing the leather straps, made a sort of stirrup that would hold
it together once it was on.

When that was done, Claire, looking shapeless and tousled in the
loose-fitting coverall, handed me one of the sticky-rich candy bars from
the rations. “Thad,” she said with her mouth full, “you just _wouldn’t_
go to see Dr. Ponder. Why not? Don’t you trust him?”

“Sure I trust him,” I said shortly. Why mention that I was keeping away
from him because of Luana? “Come on,” I said.

We crossed through a neck of the forest to the rolling scrub-meadow on
the other side, and down and across the first little valley.

“This is where I was last night. There’s something just over the next
rise that I want you to see. Last night I was afraid you’d see it.”

“What’s so different about today, then?”

“I found out last night you’re not afraid of anything.”

She did not answer. I looked back at her. She was grinning. “You said
something nice about me,” she half-sang.

“Not necessarily. Sometimes fearlessness is nothing more than rank
stupidity.”

She swallowed that silently. As we climbed the rise she asked, “Will you
tell me about the time you saw me be beautiful?”

“Later,” I said.

Abruptly she clutched my arm. _“Look!”_

“Where? What?”

“There!” She pointed. “No—there—there, see?” She pointed rapidly to the
ground, to a rock, to a spot in midair to our left. “See?”

“What is it, Claire? A deer-fly? Or spots in the eyes?”

“Just watch,” she said with exaggerated patience. “The little animal I
fell on that time—remember? It’s all around here, and moving so _fast_!”

There are certain optical illusions where a missing object becomes
vividly clear as soon as you know what to look for. I focused my mind’s
eye on what she had described as a tapering, fan-tailed monstrosity with
two front legs and a blue-black hide, and suddenly, fleetingly, there it
was, crouching against the sheer side of the bluff. It blinked at me,
and then disappeared, only to pop into sight for a fraction of a second
right in front of us. We moved back with alacrity as if pulled by the
same string.

“I want out!” I gasped. “That’s the thing that gave you the fancy boot!”

Somehow we were twenty feet back and still backing. Claire laughed. “I
thought that was your specialty.”

“You pick the dog-gonnedest times … get back, Claire! Heaven knows what
will happen to you if it gets to you again!”

She stood still, peering. The thing, whatever it was, appeared twice,
once a little to the right, once—and this time, for a full two or three
seconds—over against the side-hill. It balanced on two forelegs, its
head thrust out, its wide fluked tail curled up over its back, and it
blinked rapidly. Its eyes were the same color as its skin, but shiny. It
disappeared. Claire said, “It can’t hurt us. Dr. Ponder said the
condition would be arrested where it is.”

I snorted. “That’s like saying you’re immunized against being bumped by
a truck because one ran over you once. Let’s get out of here.”

She laughed at me again. “Why, Thad! I’ve never seen you like this!
You’re pale as milk!”

“You have so seen me like this,” I quavered. “The last time you called
me sensible. Remember?”

The blue-black thing appeared again almost under my feet. I squeaked and
jumped. Then it was by Claire, inches away. She bent toward it, hand
outstretched, but it vanished.

“Thad, it seems terribly excited. I think it wants something.”

“That I don’t doubt,” I said through clenched teeth. “Claire. Listen to
me. Either you will hightail with me out of this imp-ridden corner of
hell, or you and that monstrosity can stay here and watch me dwindle.”

“Oh, _Thad!_ stop blithering. The poor little thing is probably ten
times as frightened as you are.”

“Oh no it isn’t,” I said with authority. “It’s alive, isn’t it?”

She snorted and squatted down in the grass, her hands out and close
together. Simultaneously with my warning cry, the creature appeared
between her hands. Very slowly she moved them together. I stood
petrified, babbling. “Claire, don’t, please don’t, just this once how do
you know what that thing might do, Claire … Okay—it’s small, Claire. So
is a _fer de lance_. So is a forty-five slug. Please, Claire …”

“_Will_ you stop that infernal chattering!” she snapped. And just before
her closing hands could touch the beast it was gone, to reappear six
inches to the left.

She rose and stepped forward gently, stooping. The poised animal—if it
was an animal—waited until she was a fraction of an inch away and again
bounded out of visibility and in again, this time a yard away, where it
waited, blinking violently.

“I think it wants us to follow it,” said Claire. “Come on, Thad!”

It moved again, farther away, and bounced up and down.

“Oh, Claire,” I said at last, “I give up. We’re in this together and
we’ve got to depend on each other. Maybe you’re right after all.”

Surprisingly, there were tears in her eyes as she said, “I feel as if
you had been away a long time and just got back.”

I thumped her shoulder, and we went on. We followed the strange creature
up the slope to its crest, where the creature disappeared again, this
time, apparently, for good.

Claire had been right, we found a moment later. Distantly, sunlight
flashed on the windshield of Ponder’s parked convertible, which was
parked where the Wood road skirted the desolate flatland. Nearing the
foothills where we stood were two plodding figures, and it was easy to
spot Ponder, for no one else in the area had his stooped height and
breadth. He was so perfectly in proportion that he made normal people
look underdone. The other, I noticed with a gulp, was Luana, with her
contained, erect posture, and the sunlight, after its cold journey
through space, reveling in the heat of her hair.

We went to meet them. I looked once at Claire, catching her at the
woman’s trick of swift comparative appraisal of Luana’s trim plaid skirt
and snug windbreaker, and I smiled. Claire’s coverall was not a company
garment.

“Thad!” the doctor boomed. He had an organ voice; in conversation it
always seemed to be throttled down, and his shout was a relaxation
rather an effort. “And Claire … we were worried.”

“Why?” asked Claire. We reached them. I buzzed right on past the
doctor—“Hi, Doc,”—and took both Luana’s hands. “Lu.”

She looked up at me and smiled. Those lips, so taut, so filled with what
strange honey … when they smiled they grew still fuller. She said Hello,
and I thought, what’s language for? what’s poetry for? when two small
syllables can mean so much … I held her hands so hard and so long that
it may have been embarrassing. It was for me, anyway, when Claire’s
voice broke into my ardent scansion of Luana’s eyes with “Hey! Svengali!
Got her hypnotized yet?”

I released Luana, who looked Claire’s rumpled flying suit up and down.
“Hello, Claire,” she purred. “Hunting?”

“Just walking the dog,” said Claire through her teeth.

I met the doctor’s eyes and he grinned. “Good of you to take all this
trouble over Claire’s trouble,” he said. “She just told me you knew
about it. Does anyone else?”

I shook my head, but said, “Why all the mystery, Doctor?”

“I certainly don’t have to tell you that this is not an ordinary medical
matter.”

Claire said, “Let’s go on up to the Wood and sit down and talk. It’s
getting hot.”

“I’ll tote that if it’s heavy,” I offered, indicating Ponder’s black
bag.

“Oh no. Just a couple of things I brought with me, just in case.”

He and Claire started back up toward the Wood. I put my hand on Luana’s
forearm and checked her.

“What is it, Thad?”

“I just want them to get a little way ahead. Luana, this is wonderful.
What on earth made him come out here? And with you?”

“I don’t know. He’s a strange man, Thad. Sometimes I think he knows
everything. Nothing surprises him.” We began to walk. “We were working
this morning—he was dictating some letters—and he all of a sudden
stopped as if he was listening to something. Next thing I knew we were
on our way.”

“Does he really know what’s the matter with Claire’s foot?”

She looked at me. Her eyes were auburn and most disturbing. “I’m not
supposed to talk about it.”

“She told me. It turned into a cloven hoof. I’ve seen it.”

“Oh. Then why ask?”

I hadn’t expected this kind of resistance. “I mean, does he know _why_
it happened?”

“Of course he does.”

“Well, why?” I asked impatiently.

“Why not ask him?” She shrugged. “He’s the doctor. I’m not.”

“Sorry I asked,” I said glumly. I was annoyed—I think at myself. I don’t
know why, subconsciously, I always expected this vision to melt into my
arms, and was always sticking my neck out. But that’s the way it is when
you get fireworks

We walked on in silence. Claire and the doctor had disappeared into the
Wood when we entered the edge of it. We stopped for a moment to look
about. There was, of course, no path, and the windless growth muffled
and absorbed sounds, so it was difficult to know which way they had
gone. I started in, but Luana held me back. “I don’t think they’re that
way.”

“I’ll yell,” I said, but she put a hand to her mouth. “Oh, _no!_”

“Why not, Lu?”

“I’m—I don’t know. You shouldn’t, in here.” She looked about the silent
halls of the forest. “Please, Thad. Go look for them. I’ll wait. But
don’t shout, please.”

Completely puzzled, I said, “Well, sure, honey. But I don’t get it. Is
something the matter?”

“No. Nothing.” Her arched nostrils twitched. “Go look for them, Thad.
I’ll wait here, in case they come back for us.”

“You’re sure you’ll be all right?”

“Go on. Go on,” she said urgently. I suddenly thought that for certain
reasons I might be behaving tactlessly. I must have blushed like a
schoolgirl. “Well, sure. I’ll be right back. I mean, I’ll find ’em and
call you.” I flapped a good-bye self-consciously and blundered off
through the woods. That girl really threw me for a loss.

I followed the level ground until I emerged from the Wood at the other
side of its narrow neck—just what I should have done in the first place.
Doctor Ponder and Claire were out in the open fifty yards away,
apparently waiting for us. I went to them. “We lost you,” I said.
“Luana’s waiting back there. She didn’t want to thrash around in the
woods hunting for you. Hold on and I’ll get her.”

Ponder’s big head went up, and his eyes seemed to focus on something I
couldn’t see for a moment. Then, “Don’t bother,” he said. “She’s all
right. I wanted to talk to you two anyway. Let’s go in the shade and sit
down.”

“But—will she be all right?”

“She’ll be all right,” he grinned. He had good teeth.

I shrugged. “Everybody seems to know what’s right around here but me,” I
said petulantly. “All right.” I led the way to a thicket at the edge of
the wood and plumped down with my back against a tree. Claire and the
doctor joined me, Ponder setting his bag carefully within his reach.

“Now for heaven’s sake tell us,” said Claire, who had kept an amused
silence during my jitterings about Luana. She turned to me. “He wouldn’t
say a thing until you got here.”

“Tell us about what? Who knows anything?” I said resignedly.

“You know about her foot,” said Dr. Ponder. He looked down. “What,
speaking of feet, has happened to your boot?”

I happened to be looking at Claire, and microscopically shook my head.
“Oh,” I said casually, “I left it on a railroad track while I was frog
hunting in a culvert. Go on about Claire.” Claire’s eyes widened in
astonishment at this continued deception, but she said nothing. I was
pleased.

Ponder leaned back. He had a long head and a big jaw. The touch of gray
at his temples and the stretched smoothness of his skin told lies about
each other. He said, “First, I want to thank you both—you, Claire,
because you have trusted me in this matter, when I had every reason to
expect nothing but hysteria from you, and you, Thad, for having kept
your own counsel. Now I’ll tell you what I know. Please don’t mind if I
seem to wander a bit. I want you to get this straight in your minds.” He
closed his eyes for a moment, his brow furrowed. Then he wet his lips
and continued.

“Imagine a man walking up to a door which stands firmly locked. He
raises his hand and makes a certain motion. The door opens. He enters,
picks up a wand. He waves it; it suddenly glows with light. He says two
words, and a fire appears in the fireplace. Now: could you duplicate
that?”

“I’ve seen doors open for people in a railroad station,” said Claire.
“They had a beam of light in front of them. When you walked into it, a
photoelectric cell made the door open.”

“About that wand,” I put in. “If it was made of glass, it could have
been a fluorescent tube. If there was a radio frequency generator in the
room, it could make a tube glow, even without wire connections.”

“I once saw a gadget connected to a toy electric train,” Claire said.
“You say ‘Go!’ into a speaker and the train would go. You say ‘Now back
up’ and it would back up. It worked by the number of syllables you
spoke. One would make the train go forward; three would make it stop and
back up. That fire you mentioned, that could be controlled by a gadget
like that.”

“Right. Quite right,” said the doctor. “Now, suppose you fixed up all
that gadgetry and took it back in time a couple of centuries. What would
the performance look like to a person of the time—even an intelligent,
reasonable one?”

I said, “Witchcraft.” Claire said, “Why, magic.”

Ponder nodded. “But they’d understand a kitchen match. But take a
kitchen match back a couple more centuries, and you’d get burned at the
stake. What I’m driving at is that given the equipment, you can get the
results, whether those results can be understood by the observer or not.
The only sane attitude to take about such things is to conclude that
they are caused by some natural, logically explained agency—and that we
haven’t the knowledge to explain it any more than the most erudite
scholar could have explained radar two centuries ago.”

“I follow that,” I said, and Claire nodded.

“However,” said Ponder, “most people don’t seem to accept such things
that easily. Something happens that you can’t understand, and either you
refuse to believe it happened at all—even if you saw it with your own
eyes—or you attribute it to supernatural forces, with all their
associated claptrap of good and evil, rituals and exorcisms. What I’m
putting to you is that everything that’s happened to you is perfectly
logical and believable in its own terms—but it’s much larger than you
think. I’m asking you to accept something much more mysterious than an
r-f generator would be to a Puritan settler. You just have to take my
word for it that it’s as reasonable a thing as an r-f generator.”

“I don’t understand an r-f generator, as it is,” smiled Claire. I heard
the soft sound of her hoof clicking. “Go ahead, Doctor. At this point
I’m ready to believe anything.”

“Fine,” applauded the doctor. “It’s a pleasure to talk to you. Now, I’m
going to use ‘good’ and ‘evil’ in this explanation because they’re
handy. Bear in mind that they are loose terms, partial ones: external
evidences of forces that extend forward and back and to either side in
time and space.” He laughed. “Don’t try to follow that. Just listen.

“A long time ago there were two opposed forces—call them intelligences.
One was good and one was evil. It turned out to be quite a battle, and
it went on for some time. There were gains and losses on each side,
until one was captured by the other. Now, these intelligences were not
living creatures in the ordinary sense, and in the ordinary sense they
could not be killed. There are legends of such captures—the bound
Prometheus, for example, and the monster under Yggdrasil. The only way
to keep such forces imprisoned is to lock them up and set a watch over
them. But, just as in our civilization, it may take profound
intelligence and a great deal of hard work to capture a criminal, but
far less intelligence and effort to keep him in jail.

“And that’s the situation we have here. Not far from where we sit, one
of those things is imprisoned, and he—I say ‘he’ for convenience—has his
jailer.

“That’s the thing known as ‘The Camel’s Grave.’ The Camel is a living
intelligence, captured and held here and, if right has its way, doomed
to spend the rest of eternity here.”

“That’s a long time,” I put in. “The Earth won’t last that long.”

“He’ll be moved in time,” said Ponder complacently; and that was when I
began to realize how big this thing was. There was that about Doctor
Ponder which made it impossible to disbelieve him. I stared at Claire,
who stared back. Finally she turned to him and asked in a small voice,
“And—what about my foot?”

“That was a piece of tough luck,” said Ponder. “You are a sort
of—uh—innocent bystander. You see, the Camel is surrounded by … damn it,
it’s hard to find words that make sense! Fields. Look: if I call them
‘spells,’ will you understand that I’m not talking mumbo-jumbo? If I
call them ‘fields,’ it presupposes coils and generators and circuits and
so on. In this way ‘spells’ is more accurate.”

“I’m with you so far,” I said. Claire nodded.

“Well, the Camel is conscious. He wants out. Like any other prisoner, he
looks through the bars from time to time and talks with his jailer—and
with anyone else he can reach. What you stumbled into, though, wasn’t
the Camel: he’s pretty well sealed away from that. You hit one of the
spells—one of the small warning devices set there in case he should
begin to escape. If it had hit him, it would have stung him a little,
perhaps like an electric fence. But when you walked into it, you got
that hoof. Why the result was exactly that I can’t say. It’s the nature
of the thing. It’s happened before, as mythology will tell you.”

“I’ve thought of that,” I said. “Pan and the satyrs, and so on. They all
had cloven hooves. And isn’t the Devil supposed to have one too?”

“One of the marks of the beast.” Ponder nodded. “Now, as to what can be
done about it, I’m here to do the best I can. Claire, exactly where was
it that you walked into—whatever it was, and fell down on that little
animal?”

“I don’t know,” she said calmly. “I haven’t been able to locate it. I
should be able to—ever since I was a child I’ve had dream compulsions to
come out here, and I know this country like my own house.”

“I wish you could find it. It would help.” Ponder twiddled the catch on
his black bag thoughtfully. “We have to try to get through to the Camel
and let him know what has happened to you. He could counteract it. Well,
anyway, we might be able to do something. We’ll see.”

“Doc,” I said, “about that hoof. You’re sure it was from contact with
something out here. I mean, couldn’t it have been something in town that
caused it?”

“Positively not,” he said. And I said to myself, now that is damned
interesting, because I have a hoof too and I was never out here before
last night.

Ponder turned to Claire. “Exactly why did you come out here that time
you saw the little animal?”

“In a way it was your doing, Doctor. It was that Medusa Club meeting.
You made me so mad with your intimations that there were still magical
forces at work, and that superstitions served to guard humanity against
them.” She laughed diffidently. “I don’t feel the same way now, so
much … Anyway, I know this part of the country well. I made up my mind
to go to the most magical part of it at the most magical time—the full
moon—and stick my neck out. Well, I did.”

“Uh-huh,” said the doctor. “And why did you come out yesterday?”

“To find Thad.”

“Well, Thad? What were you after?”

“I wanted to see what is was Claire had walked into.”

“Didn’t trust my diagnosis?”

“Oh, it wasn’t that. If I’d found anything at all, I probably would have
told you about it. I was just curious about the cause and cure of cloven
hooves.”

“Well, I could have told you that you wouldn’t find anything. Claire
might, but you wouldn’t.”

“How so?”

“Hasn’t it dawned on you yet that Claire is something special? In a
sense she’s a product of this very ground. Her parents—”

“I told him that story,” said Claire.

“Oh. Well, that was the Camel at work. The only conceivable way for him
to break out of his prison is through a human agency; for there is that
in human nature that not even forces such as the one which imprisoned
him can predict. They can be controlled, but not predicted. And if the
Camel should ever be freed—”

“Well?” I asked, after a pause.

“I can’t tell you. Not ‘won’t.’ ‘Can’t.’ It’s big, though. Bigger than
you can dream. But as I was saying, Claire’s very presence on Earth is
his doing.”

“My parents were murdered,” said Claire.

I turned to her, shocked. She nodded soberly. “When I was six.”

“I think you’re right,” said Ponder. “Their marriage was a thing that
could cancel many of the—the devices that imprison the Camel. The very
existence of a union like that threatened the—what we can call the
prison walls. It had to be stopped.”

“What happened?”

“They died,” said Claire. “No one knew why. They were found sitting on a
rock by the road. He had his arm around her and her head was on his
shoulder and they were dead. I always felt that they were killed on
purpose, but I never knew why.”

“The Camel’s fault,” said Ponder, shrugging.

I asked. “But why didn’t they—he—kill Claire too while he was about it?”

“She was no menace. The thing that was dangerous was the—the radiation
from the union that her parents had. It was an unusual marriage.”

“My God!” I cried. “You mean to say that Camel creature, whatever it is,
can sit out here and push people’s lives around like that?”

“That’s small fry, Thad. What he could do it he were free is
inconceivable.”

I rubbed my head. “I dunno, Doc. This is getting to be too much. Can I
ask some questions now?”

“Certainly.”

“How come you know so much about all this?”

“I am a student of such things. I stumbled on this whole story in some
old documents. As a matter of fact, I took the medical practice out here
just so I could be near it. It’s the biggest thing of its kind I’ve ever
run across.”

“Hm. Yet you don’t know where the Camel’s Grave is, exactly.”

“Wrong,” said the doctor. “I do. I wanted to know if Claire had been
able to find it. If she had been able to, it would mean that the Camel
had established some sort of contact with her. Since he hasn’t, I’ll
have to do what I can.”

“Oh. Anyone who can find the Grave is in contact with the Camel, then.”

“That’s right. It takes a special kind of person.”

I very consciously did not meet Claire’s gaze. There was something very
fishy going on here, and I began to feel frightened. This thing that
could shrivel a foot into a hoof, it could kill too. I asked, “What
about this ‘jailer’ you mentioned. Sort of a low-grade variety of the
Camel himself?”

“Something like that.”

“That little animal—would that be it?”

A peculiar expression crossed the doctor’s face, as if he had remembered
something, dragged it out, glanced at it, found it satisfactory, and put
it away again. “No,” he said. “Did you ever hear of a familiar?”

“A familiar?” asked Claire. “Isn’t that the sort of pet that a witch or
a wizard has—black cats and so on?”

“Yes. Depending on the degree of ‘wizard’ we’re dealing with, the
familiar may be a real animal or something more—the concretion, perhaps,
of a certain kind of thought-matrix. That little animal you described to
me is undoubtedly the Camel’s familiar.”

“Then where’s the jailer?” And as I asked, I snapped my fingers.
“Goo-goo!”

“Not Goo-goo!” Claire cried. “Why, he’s perfectly harmless. Besides—he
isn’t all there, Thad.”

“He wouldn’t have to be,” said the doctor, and smiled. “It doesn’t take
much brains to be a turnkey.”

“I’ll be darned,” I said. “Well, now, what have we got? A cloven hoof
and an imprisoned _something_ that must stay imprisoned or else. A
couple of nice people murdered, and their pixilated daughter. All right,
Doctor—how do you go about curing cloven hooves?”

“Locate the Camel’s Grave,” said Doctor Ponder, “and then make a rather
simple incantation. Sound foolish?” He looked at both of us. “Well, it
isn’t. It’s as simple and foolish as pressing a button—or pulling a
trigger. The important thing is who does it to which control on what
equipment. In this case Claire is the one indicated, because she’s—what
was it Thad said?—pixilated. That’s it. Because of the nature of her
parents’ meeting, because of what they had together, because she is of
such a character as to have been affected by the Camel to the extent of
the thing that happened to her foot—it all adds up. She’s the one to do
it.”

“Then anyone who’s subject to this particular kind of falling arches
could do it?” I asked innocently.

“ ‘Anyone’—yes. But that can’t happen to just anyone.”

I asked another question, quickly, to cover up what I was thinking.
“About familiars,” I said. “Don’t I recall something about their feeding
on blood?”

“Traditionally, yes. They do.”

“Uh-huh. The blood of the witch, as I recall. Well how in time can the
Camel character supply any blood to his familiar if he’s been buried
here for—how long is it?”

“Longer than you think … Well, in a case like that the familiar gets
along on whatever blood it can find. It isn’t as good, but it serves.
Unless, of course, the familiar makes a side trip just for variety.
Occasionally one does. That’s where the vampire legends come from.”

“How to you like that?” I breathed. “I’ll bet a cookie that the animals
Goo-goo traps are supplying blood to the Camel’s familiar—and Goo-goo
supposed to be guarding the jail!”

“It’s very likely—and not very important. The familiar can do very
little by itself,” said the doctor. He turned to Claire. “Did you ever
see anything like a familiar taking blood? Think, now.”

Claire considered. “No. Should I have?”

“Not necessarily. You could though,” he indicated her foot, “being what
you are.”

She shuddered slightly. “So I’m privileged. I’d as soon not, thank you.”

I sprang to my feet. “I just thought … Luana. What could have happened
to her?”

“Oh, she’s all right. Sit down, Thad.”

“No,” I said. “I’d better go look for her.”

Claire leaned back, caught her knee in her hands, and made a soft and
surprisingly accurate replica of a wolf-howl. “Drop desperately ill,” I
said to her, and to Doctor Ponder, “That’s for people you like too well
to tell ’em to drop dead.” And I strode off.

It took only a few minutes to regain the spot where I had left Luana.
She was not there.

I stood still, my brain racing. Witches, wizards, familiars … people who
could see familiars sucking blood, and people who could not … one more
cloven hoof than the good doctor bargained for, and a theory that such a
thing came from contact with Something out here, when I knew darned well
I had acquired mine in town … a girl who did what her dreams told her to
do and another with hair like hot metal and lips bursting with some cool
sweetness. And where was she?

I moved into the Wood, walking quietly more because of caution for my
torn boot than for any other reason, and peering into the mottled
shadows. Once, with my eyes fixed on a distant clearing, I blundered
into a nest of paper-wasps with my neck and shoulder. I started
violently and moved back. The angry creatures swarmed out and around the
damaged nest, and came after me as I sidled away, batting at them. They
bumbled against my mouth and hair and forearms, but not one stung me. I
remember thinking, when at last I was clear of them, that Claire had
said something about bees … but before I could dredge up the thought I
saw Luana.

If it had not been for the plaid skirt I couldn’t possibly have seen
her. She was as still as a tree-trunk in a little glade, her head bent,
watching something which struggled on the ground. Moving closer,
silently, I could see her face; and, seeing it, I checked any impulse I
might have to call out to her. For her face was a mask, smooth,
round-eyed, with curling lips and sharp white teeth, and it was
completely motionless except for the irregular flickering of her
nostrils, which quivered in a way reminiscent of a snake’s swift,
seeking tongue. Slowly she began to bend down. When I could no longer
see her face I came closer.

Then I could see. I shall never forget it. That was when the fireworks
went out … and a terrible truth took their place.

At the foot of a little bush was a bare spot, brushed clean now of loose
leaves, doubtless by the struggles of the rabbit. It was a large
brown-brindle rabbit caught in a whip-snare which had fouled in the
bush. The snare had caught the animal around the barrel, just behind the
forelegs, probably having been set in a runway. The rabbit was very much
alive and frightened.

Luana knelt slowly and put out her hands. She picked the rabbit up. I
said to myself, the darling! She’s going to help it!… and I said, down
deeper, but a woman looks tenderly at the thing she is about to help,
and Luana’s face, now, whatever it was, it wasn’t tender.

She lifted the rabbit and bit into it as if it were an apple.

I don’t know what I did. Not exactly. I remember a blur of trunks, and a
dim green. I think I heard Luana make a sound, a sign, perhaps—even a
low laugh. I don’t know. And I must have run. Once I hit something with
my shoulder. Anyway, when I reached Claire and the doctor I was panting
hoarsely. They looked up at me as I stood panting, not speaking. Then
without a word, Ponder got up and ran back the way I had come.

“Thad! Oh, Thad—what is it?”

I sank down beside her and shook my head.

“Luana? Did something happen to Luana, Thad?”

“I’ll tell you,” I whispered. Something trickled down the outside of my
nose. Sweat, I suppose. “I’ll tell you, but not now.”

She pushed my hair back. “All right, Thad,” she said. And that was all,
until I got my breath back.

She began to talk then, softly and in a matter-of-fact tone, so that I
had to follow what she said; and the sharp crooked edges of horror
blunted themselves on new thoughts. She said, “I’m beginning to
understand it now, Thad. Some of it is hard to believe, and some of it I
just don’t _like_ to believe. Doctor Ponder knows a lot, Thad, a whole
lot … Look.” She reached into the doctor’s bag, now open, and brought
out a limp black book. On its cover, glittering boldly in a sunbeam, was
a gilt cross. “You see, Thad? Good and evil … Doctor Ponder’s using
this. Could that be evil? And look. Here—read it yourself.” She opened
the book at a mark and give it to me.

I wiped my eyes with my knuckles and took the book. It was the Bible,
the New Testament, open to the sixth chapter of Matthew. The thirteenth
verse was circled: It was the familiar formula of praise:

_“Thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory for ever and ever.
Amen.”_

“Look at the bottom margin,” she urged.

I looked at the neat block lettering penciled there. _“Ah-tay mahlkuth
vé-G’boorah vé-Gédula lé o’lam, om,”_ I read haltingly. “What on earth
is that?”

“It’s the Hebrew translation of the thirteenth verse. And—it’s the
trigger, the incantation Doctor Ponder told us about.”

“Just that? That little bit?”

“Yes. And I’m supposed to go to the Camel’s Grave and face the east and
say it. Then the Camel will know that I have been affected and will fix
the trouble. Doctor Ponder says that although he is evil—a ‘black’
magician—he can have no reason to leave me in this state.” She leaned
forward and lowered her voice. “Nor you either. You’ll go with me and
we’ll both be cured.”

“Claire—why haven’t you told him I’ve got a hoof too?”

She looked frightened. “I—can’t,” she whispered. “I tried, and I can’t.
There’s something that stops me.”

I looked at the book, reading over the strange, musical sounds of the
formula. They had a rhythm, a lilt. Claire said, “Doctor Ponder said I
must recite that in a slow monotone, all the while thinking ‘Camel, be
buried forever, and never show yourself to mankind.’ ”

“Be buried forever? What about your foot? Aren’t you supposed to say
something about your foot?”

“Well, didn’t I?”

“You did not.” I leaned forward and looked close into her eyes. “Say it
again.”

“ ‘Camel, be buried forever, and never show yourself to mankind.’ ”

“Where’s the part about the foot?”

She looked at me, puzzled. “Thad—didn’t you hear me? I distinctly said
that the Camel was to restore my foot and yours and then lie down and
rest.”

“Did you, now? Say it again, just once more, the way you’re supposed
to.”

Obediently she said, “ ‘Camel, be buried forever, and never show
yourself to mankind.’ There. Was that clear enough? About the foot, and
all?”

Suddenly I understood. She didn’t know what she was saying! I patted her
knee. “That was fine,” I said. I stood up.

“Where are you going?”

“I have to think,” I said. “Mind, Claire? I think better when I walk.
Doctor Ponder’ll be back soon. Wait here, will you?”

She called to me, but I went on into the Wood. Once out of her sight, I
circled back and downgrade, emerging on the rim of what I now knew was
the Forbidden Valley. From this point I could easily see the bluff at
the far end. There was no sign of the skull. I began to walk down to
where it should be. I knew now that it was there, whether it could be
seen or not. I wished I could be sure of a few dozen other things.
Inside, I was still deeply shaken by what I had seen Luana doing, and by
what it meant—by what it made of me, of Claire, of Ponder.…

Behind me there was a horrible gargling sound. It was not a growl or a
gurgle; it was exactly the hollow, fluid sound that emerges from
bathrooms in the laryngitis season. I spun, stared.

Staring back at me was one of the most unprepossessing human beings I
have ever seen. He had matted hair and a scraggly beard. His eyes were
out of line horizontally, and in disagreement with each other as to what
they wanted to look at. One ear was pointed and the other was a mere
clump of serrated flesh.

I backed off a pace. “You’re Goo-goo.”

He gabbled at me, waving his arms. It was a disgusting sound. I said,
“Don’t try to stop me, Mister America. I know what I’m doing and I mean
to do it. If you get too near me I’ll butter these rocks with you.”

He gargled and bubbled away like mad, but kept his distance. Warily I
turned and went on down the slope. I thought I heard Claire calling. I
strode on, my mind awhirl. Luana. Ponder. Claire. Goo-goo. The chained
skull, and the blue beast. The rabbit. Luana, Luana and those
lips … _Ah-tay mahlkuth …_ and a cloven hoof. I shook my head to clear
my brain … _vé-G’boorah_.…

I was on level ground, approaching the bluff. “Get up, Camel!” I barked
hoarsely. “Here I come, ready or not!”

Shocking, the skull, the famous mark of the Camel’s Grave, appeared on
the ground. It was a worn, weather-beaten skull, worn far past the
brilliant bleaching of bones merely desiccated and clean. It was
yellowed, paper-brittle. The eyebrow ridges were not very prominent, and
the lower jaw, what I could see of it, was long, firm. Its most shocking
feature was part of it, but not naturally part of it. It was a chain of
some black metal, its lower link disappearing into the ground, its upper
one entering the eye socket and coming out through the temple. The chain
had a hand-wrought appearance, and although it was probably as thick as
the day it was made, unrusted and strong, I knew instinctively that it
was old, old. It seemed to be—it _must_ be—watching me through its empty
sockets. I thought I heard the chain clink once. The bleached horror
seemed to be waiting.

There was a small scuffling sound right at my heels. It was Goo-goo. I
wheeled, snarling at him. He retreated, mouthing. I ground out, “Keep
out of my reach, rosebud, or I’ll flatten you!” and moved around to the
left of the skull where I could face the east.

_“Ah-tay mahlkuth vé_—_”_ I began; and something ran across my foot. It
was the blue beast, the familiar. It balanced by the skull, blinking,
and disappeared. I looked up to see Goo-goo approaching again. His face
was working; he was babbling and drooling.

“Keep clear,” I warned him.

He stopped. His clawlike hand went to his belt. He drew a hornhandled
sheath knife. It was blue and keen. I had some difficulty in separating
my tongue from the roof of my mouth. I stood stiffly, trying to brace
myself the way an alerted cat does, ready to leap in any direction, or
up, or flat down.

Goo-goo watched me. He was terrifying because he did not seem
particularly tense, and I did not know what he was going to do. What was
he, anyway? Surely more than a crazy deaf-mute, mad with loneliness. Was
he really the jailer of a great Power? Or was he, in some way, in league
with that disappearing bad-dream of a familiar?

I began again: _“At-tay mahlkuth vé-G’boor_—_“_ and again was distracted
by the madman. For instead of threatening me with his glittering blade,
he was performing some strange manual of arms with it, moving it from
shoulder to shoulder as I spoke, extending it outward, upward … and he
stopped when I stopped, looking at me anxiously.

At last there seemed to be some pattern, some purpose, to what he was
trying to do. When I spoke a certain phrase, he made a certain motion
with the knife. _“Ah-tay …”_ I said experimentally. He touched his
forehead with the knife. I tried it again; he did it again. Slowly,
then, without chanting, I recited the whole rigmarole. Following me
attentively, he touched his forehead, his chest, his right shoulder, his
left, and on the final _“om”_ he clasped his hands together with the
point of the knife upward.

“Okay, chum,” I said. “Now what?”

He immediately extended the knife to me, hilt first. Amazed, I took it.
He nodded encouragingly and babbled. He also smiled, though the same
grimace a few minutes earlier, before I was convinced of his honest
intentions, would have looked like a yellow-fanged snarl to me. And upon
me descended the weight of my appalling ignorance. How much difference
did the knife make to the ritual? Was it the difference between blanks
and slugs in a gun? Or was it the difference between pointing it at
myself or up in the air?

Ponder would know. Ponder, it developed, did, and he told me, and I
think he did it in spite of himself. As I stood there staring from the
steel to the gibbering Goo-goo, Ponder’s great voice rolled down to me
from the Wood end of the vale. _“Thad! Not with the knife!”_

I glanced up. Ponder was coming down as fast as he could, helping Claire
with one hand and all but dragging Luana with the other. Goo-goo began
to dance with impatience, guggling away like an excited ape, pointing at
me, at his mouth, at the knife, the staring skull. The blue beast
flickered into sight between his legs, beside him, on his shoulder, and
for a brief moment on his head, teetering there like some surrealistic
plume. I took all this in and felt nothing but utter confusion.

Claire called, “Put down the knife, Thad!”

Something—some strange impulse from deep inside me, made me turn and
grin at them as they scurried down toward me. I bellowed, “Why, Doc! I
don’t qualify, do I?”

Ponder’s face purpled. “Come out of there!” he roared. “Let Claire do
it!”

I reached down and yanked the makeshift stirrup from my boot, laughing
like a maniac. I kicked off the toe of the boot with its padding, and
hauled the rest up my leg. “What’s she got that I haven’t got?” I
yelled.

Ponder, still urging the girls forward, turned on Luana. “You see? He
saw you feeding! He could _see_ you! You should have known!” and he
released her and backhanded her viciously. She rolled with the blow
deftly, but a lot of it connected. It was not she, however, but Claire
who gasped. Luana’s face was as impassive as ever. I grunted and turned
to face the skull, raising the knife. “How’s it go, little man?” I asked
Goo-goo. I put the point of the knife on my forehead. “That it?”

He nodded vociferously, and I began to chant.

_“Ay-tay …”_ I shifted the knife downward to my chest. Ponder was
bellowing something. Claire screamed my name.

_“Mahlkuth …”_ With part of my mind I heard, now, what Ponder was
yelling. “You’ll free him! Stop it, you fool, you’ll free him!” And
Claire’s voice again: “A gun …” I thought, down deep inside, _Free him!_
I put the knife-point on my right shoulder.

_“Vé-G’boorah!”_ There was a sharp bark of a shot. Something hit the
small of my back. The blue beast stumbled from between my feet, and as I
shifted the knife to my left shoulder, I saw it bow down and, with its
mouth, lay something at my feet. It teetered there for a split second,
its eyes winking like fan-blades in bright light, and I’ll swear the
little devil grinned at me. Then it was gone, leaving behind a bullet on
the grass.

_“Vé-Gédula …”_ I chanted, conscious that so far I had not broken the
compelling rhythm of the ancient syllables, not missed a motion with the
knife. Twice more the gun yapped, and with each explosion I was struck,
once in the face, once on the neck. Not by bullets, however, but by the
cold rubbery hide of the swift familiar, which dropped in front of me
with its little cheeks bulging out like those of a chipmunk at acorn
time. It put the two bullets down by the first and vanished. I clasped
my hands on the knife-hilt, pressing it to my chest, point upward the
way Goo-goo had done.

_“Lé o’lam …”_ From the corner of my eye I saw Ponder hurling himself at
me, and the ragged figure of little Goo-goo rising up between us. Ponder
struck the little man aside with one bear-like clubbing of his forearm,
and was suddenly assaulted either by fifty of the blue familiars or by
one moving fifty times as fast as a living thing ought to. It was in his
ears, fluttering on his face, nipping the back of his neck, clawing at
his nostrils, all at once. Ponder lost one precious second in trying to
bat the thing away, and then apparently decided to ignore it. He
launched himself at me with a roar, just as I came out with the final
syllable of the incantation: _“OM!”_

It isn’t easy to tell what happened then. They say The Egg hit Hiroshima
with “a soundless flash.” It was like that. I stood where I was, my head
turned away from the place where the skull had been, my eyes all but
closed against that terrible cold radiance. Filtering my vision through
my lashes, I saw Ponder still in midair, still coming toward me. But as
he moved, he—changed. For a second he must have been hot, for his
clothes charred. But he was cold when he hit me, cold as death. His
clothes were a flurry of chilled soot; his skin was a brittle, frigid
eggshell through which his bones burst and powdered. I stood, braced for
a solid impact that never came, showered with the scorched and frozen
detritus of what had been a man.

Still I stood, holding the knife, for hardly a full second had passed;
and my vision went out with that blinding light. I saw Claire thirty
yards away on her knees, her face in her hands; and whether she had
fallen or was praying I could not know. Goo-goo was on the ground where
Ponder had stretched him and near his body was the familiar, still at
last. Beyond stood Luana, still on her feet, her auburn eyes blindly
open to the great light, her face composed. She stepped forward slowly,
hanging her arms, but with her head erect, her heated hair flung back.
The cruel, steady light made sharp-edged shadows on the hinges of her
jaw, for all they were sunlit. For a brief moment she was beautiful, and
then she seemed to be walking down a staircase, for she grew shorter as
she walked. Her taut skin billowed suddenly like a pillow-slip on a
clothesline, and her hair slipped down and drifted off in a writhing
cloud. She opened her mouth, and it made a triangle, and she began to
bleat.

They were wordless sounds, each one higher in pitch than the one before.
Up and up they went, growing fainter as they grew higher, turning to
rat-squeaks, mouse-squeaks, bat-squeaks, and at last a high thin whistle
that was not a sound at all but a pressure on the eardrums. Suddenly
there was nothing moving there at all; there was only a plaid skirt and
a windbreaker tumbled together with blood on them. And a naked,
lizard-like thing nosed out of the pathetic pile, raised itself up on
skinny forelimbs, sniffed with its pointed snout at the light, and fell
dead.

Claire drew a long, gasping breath. The sound said nothing for Claire,
but much for the vale. It said how utterly quiet it was. I looked again
at the plaid skirt lying tumbled on the grass, and I felt a deep pain. I
did not mourn Luana, for Luana was never a woman; and I knew now that
had I never seen her again after our last kiss over the gate, I would
not have remembered her as a woman. But she had been beauty; she had
been cool lips and infernal hair, and skin of many subtle sorts of rose;
I mourned these things, in the face of which her lack of humanity was
completely unimportant.

The light dimmed. I dropped the knife and went to Claire. I sank down
beside her and put my arms around her. She let her hands slide off her
face and turned it into my shoulder. She was not crying. I patted her
hair, and we rested there until I was moved to say, “We can look at him
now,” and for a moment longer while we enjoyed the awe of knowing that
all the while he had been standing there, released.

Then, together, we turned our heads and looked at him.

He had dimmed his pent-up light, but still he blazed. I will not say
what he looked like, because he looked like only himself. I will not say
he looked like a man, because no man could look like him. He said,
“Claire, take off your boot.”

She bent to do it, and when she had, something flowed from him to us. I
had my hoof under me. I felt it writhe and swell. There was an instant
of pain. I grasped the hairy ankle as the coarse hair fell out, and then
my foot was whole again. Claire laughed, patting and stroking her
restored foot. I had never seen her face like that before.

Then _he_ laughed. I will not say what that was like either. “Thad,
Thad, you’ve done it. You’ve bungled and stumbled, but you’ve done it.”
I’ll say how he spoke, though. He spoke like a man.

“What have I done?” I asked. “I have been pushed and pulled; I’ve
thought some things out, and I’ve been both right and wrong—what have I
done?”

“You have done right—finally,” he chuckled. “You have set me free. You
have broken walls and melted bars that are inconceivable to you … I’ll
tell you as much as I can, though.

“You see, for some hundreds of thousands of years I have had a—call it a
jailer. He did not capture me: that was done by a far greater one than
he. But the jailer’s name was Korm. And sometimes he lived as a bird and
sometimes as an animal or a man. You knew him as Ponder. He was a minor
wizard, and Luana was his familiar. I too have a familiar—Tiltol there.”
He indicated the blue beast, stretched quietly out at his feet.

“Imprisoned, I could do very little. Korm used to amuse himself by
watching my struggles, and occasionally he would set up a spell to block
me even further. Sometimes he would leave me alone, to get my hopes up,
to let me begin to free myself, so that he could step in and check me
again, and laugh …

“One thing I managed to do during one of those periods was to bring
Claire’s parents together. Korm thought that the magic thing they had
between them was the tool I was developing, and when it began to look
like a strong magic, he killed them. He did not know until much later
that Claire was my magic; and when he found it out, he made a new and
irritating spell around me, and induced Claire to come out here and walk
into it. It was supposed to kill her, but she was protected; all it did
was to touch her with the mark of the beast—a cloven hoof. And it
immobilized me completely for some hours.

“When I could, I sent Tiltol after her with a new protection; without it
she would be in real danger from Korm, for he was bound to find out how
very special she was. Tiltol tried to weave the new protection around
her—and found that he could not. Her aura was no longer completely her
own. She had fallen in love; she had given part of herself away to you,
Thad. Now, since the new spell would work only on one in Claire’s
particular condition, and since he could not change that, Tiltol found a
very logical solution: He gave you a cloven hoof too, and then cast the
protection over both of you. That’s why the bear-trap did not hurt you,
and why the wasps couldn’t sting you.”

“I’m beginning to see,” I said. “But—what’s this about the ritual? How
did it set you free?”

“I can’t explain that. Roughly, though, I might say that if you regard
my prison as locked, and your presence as the key in the lock, then the
ritual was the turning of the key, and use of the knife was the
direction in which the key was turned. If you—or Claire, which was
Korm’s intention—had used the ritual without the knife, I would have
been more firmly imprisoned than ever, and you two would have lived out
your lives with those hooves.”

“What about Goo-goo? I thought for a while that he was the jailer.”

He chuckled. “Bless you, no. He is what he seems to be—a harmless,
half-demented old man, keeping himself out of people’s way. He isn’t
dead, by the way. When he wakes, he’ll have no recollection of all this.
I practiced on him, to see if I could get a human being to perform the
ritual, and he has been a good friend. He won’t lose by it. Speaking of
the ritual, though, I’d like you to know that, spectacular as it might
have been, it wasn’t the biggest part of the battle. That happened
before—when you and Claire were talking to Ponder. Remember when Claire
recited the spell and didn’t know what she was saying?”

“I certainly do. That was when I suddenly decided there was something
funny about Ponder’s story. He had hypnotized her, hadn’t he?”

“Something very like it … he was in her mind and I, by the way, was in
yours. That’s what made you leap up and go to Luana.”

I shuddered. “That was bad … evil. What about this ‘good and evil’
theory of Ponder’s, incidentally? How could he have worked evil on you
with a spell from the Bible?”

There was a trace of irritation in his voice. “You’ll have to get rid of
this ‘black and white magic’ misconception,” he said. “Is a force like
electricity ‘white’ or ‘black’? You use it for the iron lung. You use it
also for the electric chair. You can’t define magic by its methods and
its materials, but only in terms of its purpose. Regard it, not as
‘black’ and ‘white,’ but as High and Low magic. As to the Testament,
why, that ritual is older than the Bible or it couldn’t have been
recorded there. Believe me, Ponder was using it well out of its context.
Ah well, it’s all over with now. You two are blessed—do you realize
that? You both will keep your special immunity, and Claire shall have
what she most wants, besides.”

“What about you?”

“I must go. I have work to do. The world was not ordained to be without
me.

“For there is reason in the world, and all the world is free to use it.
But there has been no will to use it. There’s wilfulness aplenty, in
individuals and in groups, but no great encompassing will to work with
reason. Almost no one reads a Communist newspaper but Communists, and
only prohibitionists attend a dry convention. Humanity is split up into
tiny groups, each clinging to some single segment of Truth, and
earnestly keeping itself unaware of the other Truths that make up the
great mosaic. And even when humans are aware of the fact that others
share the same truth, they allow themselves to be kept apart from each
other. The farmer here knows that the farmer there does not want to
fight a war against him, yet they fight. I am that Will. I am the
brother of Reason, who came here with me. My brother has done well, but
he needs me, and you have set me free.”

“Who are you?” I asked.

“The earliest men called me Kamäel.”

“The Camel … in every language,” murmured Claire. Suddenly her eyes
widened. “You are—an … an _archangel_, Kamäel! I’ve read …”

He smiled, and we looked down, blinded.

“Tiltol!”

The tiny familiar twitched and was suddenly balancing on its two legs.
It moved abruptly, impossibly fast, zoomed up to Kamäel, where it
nestled in the crook of his arm. And suddenly it began to grow and
change. Great golden feathers sprouted from its naked hide, and a noble
crest. It spread wide wings. Its plumage was an incredible purple under
its golden crest and gold-tipped wings. We stared, filling our minds
with a sight no human being alive had seen—of all birds, the noblest.

“Good-bye,” said Kamäel. “Perhaps one day you will know the size of the
thing you have done. The One who imprisoned me will come back, one day,
and we will be ready for him.”

“Satan?”

“Some call him that.”

“Did he leave Earth?”

“Bless you, yes! Mankind has had no devil but himself these last twenty
thousand years! But we’ll be ready for the Old One, now.”

There was more sun, there were more colors in the world as we walked
back to town.

“It was the Phoenix!” breathed Claire for the twentieth time. “What a
thing to tell our children.”

“Whose children?

“Ours.”

“Now look,” I said, but she interrupted me. “Didn’t he say I was to have
what I wanted most?”

I looked down at her, trying hard not to smile. “Oh, all right,” I said.



WHAT DEAD MEN TELL


HE HAD TALKED with two dead men and one dead girl, and now he lay in
lightlessness. He was conscious, but there was nothing anywhere to which
to bring consciousness. This was a black that was darker than any other
blackness. A smear of this would make a black hole in precipitated
carbon.

His philosophy urged him to take an inventory. This couldn’t be just
_nothing_. Consciousness itself cannot exist with nothing; they are
mutually exclusive. Inventory, then:

Item: A blackness.

Item: Body. Breath warmly moistening the inside edges of his nostrils,
coolly drying them. A sluggish heart. Barely resilient pressure on
shoulders, buttocks, calves, heels. So the body lay on its back. Fingers
on chest. Fingers on fingers. Hands together, then, on the breast.
Therefore: Item, body laid out. Well, of course. This was the place
where death was. This was the place to discover whether death was death,
or life everlasting.

Item: The philosophy itself. The important thing. The thing that all
this was about. The philosophy was … was—Later he could think of that.
He had to find death first. So—

Item: Death. Just as surely as there was breath in his nostrils, as
surely as he was lying there, death was here. If death found him, death
was death. But if he found death, he would find his immortality. Death
was here. Here; so—

Item: _Here_. There was nothing to conclude about _here. Here_ was the
place where he lay. It was not a place he had ever been before. There
was something he had to find out about it. What? But how could he know?

_Look and see_, he told himself, and opened his eyes.

A blue-green radiance pressed itself between his lids. He lay with his
eyes stupidly unfocused, seeing as little in the light as he had in its
absence, until the straight band of lesser brightness directly above him
commanded his lenses, and he saw.

He was in a tent. No—not a tent. The walls slanted up to meet overhead,
but the juncture of the walls ran forward into blackness and back into
blackness. It was a corridor with a triangular cross section, and he was
lying on the floor. He sat up. The conscious muscular effort completed
his inventory:

Item: Identity. I am me. I am Hulon—I am here.

He knelt, and automatically pulled at his single, simple garment. It was
a belted tunic, sleeveless, with wide shoulder straps, and it fell to
mid-thigh. He wore nothing else. He pulled at the skirt
self-consciously, and examined the belt. It was a half-belt, sewn to the
fabric on each side above his hips. It had no buckle; the two ends of
material, when laid together, stayed together. He separated them—easily
when they were peeled apart, impossible when they were pulled
straight—and put them together again.

He looked about him. The floor was about thirty feet wide, and the walls
seemed about the same; the cross section was an equilateral triangle.
The quiet blue-green radiance flooded the floor around him and, less
brilliantly, the walls and the pointed overhead. Before him and behind
him, however, was utter blackness, a thick, absorbent dark that coaxed
and sucked and beckoned to the light.

There was a death waiting here for him—behind him or ahead—he did not
know which, but he knew it was there. He had to find out what death was,
before it found him. And he had to find out one other thing, and that
had to do with the corridor. He peered into the darkness before him. Was
the floor tilted the slightest bit to the right?

He glanced over his shoulder at the other blackness, and steeled
himself. _You know you will feel fear behind you. That’s natural. It may
come up behind you—but be sure. Be quite sure, or you’ll have fear to
fear, as well as death_.

He rose to his feet, really noticing for the first time that they were
bare. The floor was resilient, cool—not cold; and there was a feeling so
odd about the floor that he bent quickly and put his hand to it. It was
smooth, solid, for all its slight yielding; but in addition there was a
sensation of movement in it, as if its surface were composed of myriads
of microscopic eddies in violent, tiny motion.

He stood erect. The sensation was very slight under his feet, and so
constant that he knew he would ignore it soon. He stepped forward,
peering ahead at the floor, which seemed to be not quite canted.

He was mistaken, he found when he had moved ten or twelve paces. _Trick
of the light_. The floor ahead still seemed to tilt a little, but it was
certainly level under his feet. The light—it moved with him!

He stared around him, and saw only the same featureless floor and two
walls, It was as if he were lighted by a spotlight which was concealed
from him.

He looked behind him, and just as he turned his head, caught a movement
in the corner of his eye. He gasped and leaped to the wall, pressing his
back against it, staring into the blackness. There was something—there
_was!_ A … a thing, an _eye!_

It was low down, almost on the floor, and it was moving toward him.
Toward him, and then away, and then it stopped, and swayed, and came
toward him again, and emerged into the light.

It was a bubble. A big bubble, perhaps fourteen inches in diameter,
loosely filled, and apparently it derived its motion from the strange
mosaic of miniature maelstroms in the floor. It danced and swayed
erratically on them, sometimes turning one way, sometimes another,
occasionally rolling a little.

Hulon stepped toward it. If it was alive, it paid him no attention. It
moved, but quite aimlessly. As Hulon moved, the light moved with him,
brightly illuminating the bubble. He watched it cautiously for a moment,
and finally went down on one knee near it. He saw his distorted, dancing
reflection in its side. It seemed to be filled with a clear, pale-brown
fluid. He put out his hand, screwed up his courage, and touched it. It
quivered like jelly but made no effort to escape. He waited until it
began to roll again and quickly put his hand on the floor in front of
it. It bumped off his fingers like a toy balloon, and bounced sluggishly
up and down until it rested, waiting for the next capricious movement of
the floor under it.

Hulon impulsively reached out and picked it up. It sagged in his hands.
He pressed it gently—and it burst, leaving him staring ludicrously at
his empty hands. There was a great gush of liquid which disappeared
immediately when it reached the floor. There was no sign of a skin or
bladder of any kind; the thing was simply gone.

Hulon wiped his hands on his tunic and shrugged. The thing was obviously
inanimate. It reminded him that he was a little thirsty, but that was
all. Thirsty? Perhaps a thing like this would come in handy. He had no
idea how long he might be here before—He shrugged again and sniffed at
his fingers. The bubble had left a faint, stimulating tang on them.
Hulon nodded. If things got bad—

But couldn’t this be the death? Poison?

_Wait and see_, he told himself. _First find out what’s at the end of
the corridor_. And in a flash he knew that that was what he had been
hunting for in the back of his mind—the thing about _here_ that he must
find out. With the knowledge came the realization that only now did he
have all his faculties—that from the moment he had found himself
stretched out in the corridor, he had been only gradually regaining
them.

How had he got here? What place was this? What was that thought about
the two dead men and the dead girl he had talked with? What was the
meaning of this fantastic, skimpy garment he was wearing? Where were his
clothes? How did the light follow him?

His heart began to thump. He looked at the darknesses, the one which
led, the one which followed. Cumulative shock began to take its toll. He
turned, turned again, and then stood stock-still, his jaw muscles
standing out, his eyes narrowed.

His nerves screamed _“run!”_

He stood still, trembling with the effort. Slowly, then, he went to the
right wall and sat at its foot, his back comfortingly against it, his
eyes shifting from darkness to darkness; and he began to sort out his
thoughts.

“There are thoughts for here,” he muttered, “and thoughts for
outside—for before I came here.” He wet his lips, and consciously
relaxed his shoulders, which had begun to ache. “I am Hulon. I work at
the Empire Theater, projectionist on the day shift.”

He fixed this in his mind, refusing to think of anything else until the
thought stood clear and alone.

“Now,” he said, speaking softly because the absorbent walls—they seemed
to be of the same static-mobile material as the floor—seemed to drink
sound the way those darknesses lapped up light. “I will think of _here_
first because I am here. Whatever is to happen to me will happen here,
and not at the Empire Theater.” Again he waited, fixing the thought on
the sturdy walls of his mind until it stopped quivering.

“I don’t know where this place is nor who built it. I do know that I’m
here to meet death, and to find out what is at the end of the corridor.
I know that if I can find out what kind of death I am to meet here, and
if I can discover what is at the end of the corridor, I will live
forever. If I do not find out these things, I will die here. I agreed to
this, and I came of my own accord.”

He looked up the corridor, and down. He saw no death. He saw in-leaning
walls and a floor illuminated by the pool of light in which he was
centered. He saw two bottomless mouths of darkness. And with a start he
saw another bubble, wandering aimlessly out of the dark to his left. He
grinned at himself, and automatically wiped his hands again on his
tunic. As he did so, there was a swift movement on the wall opposite. He
tensed, stared. There was nothing there. Trick of the light?

What of the light?

He moved his hands over the brief tunic again, and again saw the blurred
motion on the wall.

A shadow!

He lifted the hem of the tunic, turned it up. The light was not coming
to the material, but _from_ it! It was luminous, through and through. No
wonder the light followed him!

Conclusion made and filed. He waited, but nothing followed it in his
mind, so he turned his attention to the events _outside_ this place.
This compartmentation of ideas was the _modus_ of his philosophy, and he
needed it now as never before. He completely displaced his attention
from his current situation and studied the events which had led to it.

The real beginning was when he wrote “Where is Security?” for _Coswell’s
Magazine_, an obscure quarterly review. But his first knowledge of these
strange events was the dead man he saw in the Empire Theater.

Remembering it, he was surprised that he had noticed the man at all.
There are, at the best of times, three degrees of work for a theater
projectionist—attentive, busy, and frantic. All three are intensified
when the theater is running revivals, if it happens that the brittle old
film is used, rather than remakes. And that particular night he was
stuck with three of them—two features and a short, fresh from a theater
where the projectionist apparently didn’t believe in splicing film
straight across like everybody else, and who cued only two frames
instead of four, so that the little flicker of light up at the corner of
the screen, which indicated when to change over projectors, was so brief
that a man had to have eyes like photocells to see them at all. He
missed two of them at one performance, getting a white screen and a
gargle from the sound track, and the second time Mr. Shenkman, the
manager, came up to the booth and was nice about it. Hulon hadn’t done
that in months, and he would have felt very much better about it if Mr.
Shenkman had stamped and cussed, but that wasn’t the manager’s way, and
Hulon had no one to be sore at but himself.

He had three viewing windows through which to see the screen—one by each
of the big IPC Simplex projectors with their hissing Magnarcs, and one
in the splicing room where the film was stored in a steel,
asbestos-chimneyed locker. As he moved about the booth, his attention
was almost constantly on these windows and the screen. As each reel
approached its end he found himself in a near-ecstasy of concentration,
trying to determine which, if any, of these spots and speckles was a
scratch on the old film or a cue.

It was unthinkable, then, that his attention should have been drawn to
anything else through those windows but the screen. But it was. Perhaps
the picture itself—an old War I epic starring Conrad Veidt—had something
to do with it. Whatever it was, as he leaned close to the glass, his
foot ready to stamp the change-over switch by B projector, his eye
caught the side-loom of the tobacco-filtered light over the loges
directly in front of the booth.

A man sat there, his spine stiff and straight—not unnaturally, but as if
this were a characteristic. The light edged a strong cheekbone, a
gleaming forehead, and a monocle. There was a slender
cigarette-holder—and then the cue-sign winked on the screen, and Hulon’s
foot came down. Projector A clattered and Projector B’s arc began to
hiss, the sprockets began to feed, the shields flipped down for A, up
for B, and the change was made. Hulon made a slight adjustment for
centering, increased the gain by the duplicated volume control directly
under the viewing window. Glancing once again at the screen, he walked
around the projector and stared at the line of light which was
periscoped up from the arc-case and projected between two black lines on
a white card, to show the size of the arc-gap. Satisfied, he opened the
lower reel-housing of Projector A and unclipped the used reel. As he did
so he glanced again at the screen, and again found himself staring at
the man in the loges. He knew that man—he was sure of it. And if that
was who he thought it was, that man was dead.

He went into the splicing room and put the reel into the rewinding
machine, which started automatically as he closed its cover. Again he
glanced out the window, and to his annoyance found that he was not
looking at the screen at all, but at the man.

He could have sworn it was Conrad Veidt himself, the famous captain of a
score of cinematic U-boats and raiders, the archetype of villainous
_Oberleutnant_, the personification of the Prussian martinet.

But Veidt died years ago.

Something touched his shoulder and he grunted and jumped violently.

“Hey,” said Frank, the second-shift man, “what’s the matter, Hulon?
Seein’ ghosts?”

“Revivals are full of ’em,” said Hulon. He looked at Frank’s grinning,
easy-going face and decided not to bother him with his hallucinations.
“You’ll have your hands full tonight, Frank. Here’s the schedule. We’re
eight minutes behind. I blew two changeovers. You’ll have to trim the
Coming Attractions rushes a couple feet each, and Mr. Shenkman says
it’ll be O.K. to leave out the Merchant’s Association announcement in
the second show. Watch the cues. Whoever marked them has a hole in his
head. And you ought to see some of the splicing! I’ve recut and fixed up
a few of ’em and”—he opened the fire-proof locker—“I stuck slips of
paper in the reels as some of that sloppy work came through. If you want
to make it easier for the next guy, you can go on fixing ’em up.”

“Gotcha,” said Frank. “What do you keep peering out there for? See a
chick in the loges you like?”

“Huh?’ said Hulon. “Oh … thought I saw someone I knew. You all ready to
take over?” The man in the loges was rising.

“That’s why I’m here.”

Hulon took down his coat. “O.K., chum. Don’t let Hollywood go to your
head.” Conscious of Frank’s surprise—for he usually stayed for ten or
fifteen minutes to bat the breeze—he whipped open the door and went down
the ladder two rungs at a time.

The man who looked like Conrad Veidt was silhouetted against the screen
as he stalked down the center aisle. Hulon hurried after him, following
him to and through the lobby. He breezed past Mr. Shenkman with a bare
nod and was beside the monocled man as they went through the wide doors
to the street.

_I don’t want to do this_, Hulon thought to himself, _but I’ll kick
myself for the rest of my life if I don’t_. He drew up beside the man at
the corner and touched his elbow. “I beg your pardon—”

“Yess?” It was the same voice, too—full and precise.

Hulon said: “You’re Conrad Veidt.” He had meant to say: “You _look_
like—” but the way the man turned, the way his eyebrow arched, were too
like what he had seen on the screen to allow any doubt.

“Am I?” said the man, and smiled. “And do you believe in immortality?”

Hulon shuffled his feet. “Well, I … I guess not. No, of course not.”

The man shrugged. “You know Conrad Veidt is dead. Obviously you are
mistaken. Good day.”

“ ’Bye,” said Hulon miserably. He watched the man walk away, and stood
there feeling very, very foolish.

That was the first dead man, Hulon thought as he crouched against the
wall of the strange corridor. Another bubble circled and danced clumsily
near him. He kicked at it; it burst and its fluid disappeared into the
floor. Now—who was the second?

Leslie Howard—two days later, under exactly similar circumstances: a
Leslie Howard picture, a familiar profile in the loges just before Frank
relieved him. He remembered wondering, as he hurried after the figure
from the past, down the aisle and through the lobby, whether his
attention had been drawn purposely this way, by some mysterious means,
or whether it was purely accidental. If it was on purpose, what could be
the purpose? What was he, that he should receive such attentions from—He
lost the thought in the moment of panic in which he stood in front of
the theater, peering, thinking he had lost his man. He saw him, then, at
the magazine stand, buying a copy of _Coswell’s Magazine_. Hulon stepped
up to him. “May I have a word with you?”

The man looked at him, his head very slightly held to one side in
Howard’s well-remembered way. “Certainly, old man.”

Hulon wet his lips. He was going to be more cautious this time. “I think
you’re Leslie Howard.”

“The devil you do! Wasn’t he killed during the war?”

“So they say.”

“Then how could I possibly be?”

“I don’t know. I’m not even trying to find that out. Look, whoever you
are; please don’t think I’m a crackpot. I’m just sort of clutching at
straws, I suppose. I’ve got some—ideas. I do what I can with them, but
as far as I can see, it’ll take me more than a lifetime to work them all
out. When I see someone alive who ought to be dead, something happens to
me. I know it must be a resemblance, but in the zillion to one chance
that a man might live longer than an average lifetime—much longer, I
mean—why, I go hog-wild on it, hunt it out, track it down, just
like”—the torrent of words slowed, stopped, and Hulon stood flushing
while the other waited politely—“I’m doing with you right now.” He
laughed uncertainly. “I don’t know why I feel I can sound off like this
to you.”

“I’ll take it as a compliment,” smiled the other, and clapped him on the
shoulder. “But—Leslie Howard was killed, all right. Sorry.” And he
walked off.

Hulon thought. _No one can know a person’s face like a projectionist_.

Day after day, hour after hour these faces are drilled into him; nuances
of voice and expression emerge that the public never sees, any more than
the public sees the flicker of a starting-cue.

The Leslie Howard man paused and said a word to a girl who stood in the
doorway of the haberdashery two doors down from the Empire. She nodded
and the man went away. She stood still; Hulon went toward her. _I can
just walk by and look at her. There’s something—_

As he neared her, she turned, and he gasped. That strange, full-lipped
face and spun-aluminum hair … they used to call her “The Blonde
Bombshell.” She was dead too. “Jean Harlow,” he choked.

She smiled and put out her hand. “How do you do?” she said
astonishingly.

He took the hand, his own self-animated to do so. He looked down at the
clasped hands as if, at the job, he had found film with triangular
sprocket-holes. He looked at her face and blinked. “My name’s Hulon—”

“And it’s your first name,” said the blonde. “I know. Can we go
somewhere to talk?”

He noticed under her arm the familiar orange cover of _Coswell’s
Magazine_—the issue in which his article had appeared. He said: “The
Empire Bar has booths.”

They went there. _I’ll wait_, he thought. _This is crazy; there are too
many questions to ask. I’ll wait. She knows what she’s doing_.

She asked: “How much education have you had, Hulon?”

He helped her with her coat and sat opposite. “Not much. High school. I
read some.”

“What made you submit to _Coswell’s?_”

“They use things like that. I thought I had an important idea. It’s part
of a … call it a philosophy, if that doesn’t sound too high-falutin’,”
he said.

“It’s a philosophy,” she said. “We can call things by their names. What
a funny, shy sort of person, you are, Hulon!”

There was nothing to say to this, so he waited. A waiter came and went.
Drinks arrived. “What got you interested in the idea of security enough
to provoke an article like this?”

“I’m a theater projectionist. I don’t follow pictures too closely, but a
lot of what they’re about sinks in. Seems to me a lot of real-life
people are worried about security, too. I began to listen to people I
know talk. A lot of them are worried about it. I began to wonder where
it was. Everybody thinks it’s somewhere else, never where a man can lay
his hand to it and say, ‘Here it is. I have it.’ So I figured out where
it was, and wrote it down, and _Coswell’s_ printed it. That’s all.”

“I read the article. But tell me again—where is security?”

“Behind us.” He looked at her expectant face, and expanded the
statement. “No use looking into the future for security because the
future doesn’t belong to us—it’s a dream, a bunch of maybes. No use
looking in the present for it because the present is, in time, like a
mathematical point—a position, without any area. So the only thing a man
has is behind him—his memories. The only thing a man can look forward to
is looking back at where he’s been. What he has means nothing. What he
_has had_ is the only thing he can hold on to—the only thing that no
power on Earth can touch. And anybody who tries to run security down
will come up against that—possessions that nothing can touch, things
that really belong to a man. So”—he shrugged—“security is not in the
future, a sort of mountaintop that people are climbing to. And it isn’t
in the present, because ‘now’ covers such a small area in time that it’s
nonexistent; you can’t have security or a cigarette or an automobile in
a portion of time so small it can’t be measured. It’s behind us. It lies
only in what we’ve had and in what we’ve done.”

“That’s a startling idea,” she said. “It sort of takes away any
possibility of self-determination, though, doesn’t it? According to your
idea, a man can act only in his present, and the present is too short a
time to do anything with.”

“No it isn’t,” said Hulon positively. “You can do this much with your
present—you can shape the nature of things to form the best possible
memory for yourself. You can form the cross section of the passing
time-stream as if you were a diamond die, and give it just the cross
section that will suit your memory the best.”

“And that means that there can be no security for _now_, for this
minute?”

“No,” Hulon said again. “Security for this minute is a kind of
self-confidence that comes from a sort of radar; impulses sent from now,
reflecting from things we have been and had and done.”

“Good,” said the girl. “I’m sorry to be catechizing you like this. I had
to know whether you retain what you set down or whether you were amusing
yourself with a passing idea. Now tell me; is this security business
your philosophy?”

“Oh no,” said Hulon. “It’s just part of it. It comes from it.”

“Ah. And have you reduced that philosophy to its essentials? Can you say
what it is in a few words?”

“Not yet. Not few enough.” He pondered for a moment. “I can say this
much. And mind you, it isn’t as rock bottom as it will be, but it’s as
far as I’ve gone, from watching people, and machines, and from reading
and listening to music. It’s this:

“What is basic is important.

“What is basic is simple.

“So what is complicated isn’t important. It might be interesting or
exciting—it might even be necessary to something else that’s
complicated—but it isn’t important.”

She nodded. “That’s good. That’s very good. And—what would you do with
an idea like that? Turn the whole world into a gigantic Walden?”

Hulon had not read Thoreau. He missed the reference, and said so. When
she explained, he said: “Gosh no. I’m no fanatic, wanting to get
everybody back to hunting, fishing and building their own log cabins.
All I want to do is to think everything out according to that idea of
mine. I mean everything: art and engineering and business and politics.
I think I could work it all out, if I had time.”

“And then what would you do with it?”

“I’d try to teach it to people—to more and more people, until it got to
be a natural way of thinking. The way people let themselves think now
just makes trouble. People think if it’s bigger it’s better. They think
if a little is good, a lot has just got to be wonderful. They can see
the sense of balance in a diet or in a bridge, but they stop too easily
at things like that, and don’t try to balance enough other things. Or
enough other _kinds_ of things,” he added, after a pause. “But all
that’s ’way ahead of me. What bothers me now is that I don’t have time
to think all this out. I know how big it is, and what a little moment a
life is. I could do more with an idea like this if I knew, somehow, that
all my thinking wasn’t going to get cut off one fine day by the old man
with the scythe.”

“And that’s really important to you?”

“Really important. Basic,” he added, grinning shyly. “So much that if I
see someone on the street who ought to be dead, I’ll stop and ask him
who he is, just in case—just on the crazy chance that someone might’ve
found out how to live longer.”

“How do you know anyone could?”

Hulon spread his hands. “I don’t. But it could happen. Old age is some
kind of a biological mistake. Maybe someone has figured out where the
mistake was made. Maybe that was done a long time ago. If it had been
done, it wouldn’t be the sort of thing you’d advertise in the daily
papers. Too many people are afraid of dying. Too many more people want
to live so that they can get more and more things, more and more power.
People would mob whoever had a treatment like that to sell, and either
the wrong people would live long, or the treatment would overpopulate
the Earth, and the human race would war itself out of existence for food
and space to live.”

“You’re so right. You have a startling kind of simplicity, Hulon. You
drive and drive right to the root of a thing. Suppose there were such a
treatment; can you say anything else about the person or persons who
might control it?”

Hulon thought for a moment. “I think so. They would be very careful
people. They would have to be able to consider the greatest good for
humanity above any race or religious or national lines. They would have
to be able to think ahead—years, centuries ahead. They would have to be
able to hold their hands, keep from interfering, even when interfering
might save thousands of lives. They would have to put pressure here and
nudge a little there in quiet ways, so that they would never be found
out, and so that humanity would always think it was learning from its
own mistakes and nothing else.”

“Do you think you are such a person?”

“No!” Hulon said immediately. “But I know I could be if I lived long
enough. I think the right way to be that kind of person.” The statement
was simple and sincere, without braggadocio.

The girl considered him for a long, pensive moment. At last she asked
him softly: “If there were immortals on Earth, and if they were all you
say, what would be their most urgent need?”

Twice, captured by her eyes, he opened his mouth to speak and closed it
again. Finally he said: “Recruits.”

She held her gaze on him, unmoving; then she nodded, as if to herself.
“How much would you give for a chance to join them?”

“How much have I got? I’d give anything.”

“Your life? Would you undertake a test that would kill you if you
failed?”

“Of course.”

She swirled her drink, “Hulon. Nothing is unique about that philosophy
of yours. There is something unusual about your method. You’ve come a
long way on very little material. You think clearly and your motives are
clean. That’s not much to go on. If you took such a test, the odds would
be very much against you.”

“Tell me,” he asked, wrinkling his brow. “Why would I have to die if I
failed?”

“Because you’d know too much.”

“I know a great deal now.”

“You are having a barroom conversation with a girl you picked up,” she
said bluntly. “No one would believe a word you might say even if I
confirmed it, which of course I wouldn’t. But if—and mind you, I’m still
talking ifs—if such a situation did exist, and if you did take such a
test, fail it, and emerge from it, you might cause trouble. Such a risk
cannot be taken.”

“That makes sense. Well, when do I start?”

She opened her handbag and took out a lipstick. Unscrewing the cap, she
slipped a nail file from under the flap of the purse and inserted it
into the cap. She worked it deftly forward and back; it fell into two
parts, and a small blue pill rolled into the hollow of her hand. She
took Hulon’s glass and dropped the tablet in. The liquid began to
effervesce violently. She handed it back. “When the effervescence stops,
drink it immediately. All of it.”

He took it, held it, waiting, and said gravely: “Are you Jean Harlow?”

She laughed. “Of course not. You had to seek us out, and you had to do
it because you might find one case of extended life, and not for any
other reason. You passed that part of it, Hulon. We did it this way
because you are a projectionist; you could be expected to notice us
particularly. We have other ways, too.”

It was the first time she had said “we.” His heart began to pound.
Abruptly the activity in the glass ceased, completely. “May you live
forever,” he said, and drank it down.

He could not remember very clearly what happened after that. He saw
clearly, he walked steadily, he spoke coherently. There is a linkage
between the conscious mind and the memory, through which flows each
impression, as noticed, to be stored. And in Hulon, this link was
broken, or at least compressed, pinched off, so that any impression,
once received, was lost in seconds. He remembered walking, and then a
ride—it was a car, but whether a taxi or a private automobile he could
not recall—and, after riding for a time which may have been minutes or
hours, there was a room with several people in it. The girl was lost
somewhere en route; there were other women, but how many or what they
looked like was lost to him. There was a man with a stern gray face who
talked with him for a long time, and a room with a wheeled table and
pale-green cornerless walls. And there was a time when he repeated and
repeated two questions:

_Where is the end of the corridor?_

_What death will I meet there?_

And the gray-faced man, kindly now, wishing him well, reassuring him,
making him certain that he would have his reward if he could answer
these questions.

And the next thing had been his awakening here in the green-lit dark.

Hulon rose and stepped to the center of the corridor. He paused and
listened. Nothing. He drew a deep breath, turned to the right and began
to march down the corridor. The skin on his back crawled occasionally,
away from the following darkness, and he did what he could to ignore it.
He began to count his paces, looking back as he counted each fifteen.
Surely nothing would overtake him in the time it took him to walk
fifteen paces.

After a few minutes the counting and turning became automatic, and his
senses became quite soothed—almost dulled—by the sameness of his
surroundings. Occasionally, he passed one or two of the bubbles doing
their purposeless gavotte on the floor. Once he saw two collide, fuse,
burst and disappear.

Where was death?

It would have to be a death from outside himself, he reasoned. Aside
from the fact that the featureless walls and floor gave him nothing to
hang himself on, and the complete absence of anything which he might
turn on himself, the idea of self-destruction was contrary to the very
nature of the test. So, he realized suddenly, was any idea that he might
die of hunger or thirst. There was no time limit to his test. Death must
present itself to him, or he to it, and that might take days. He must
sleep. Would death come to him in his sleep? He shrugged. He could only
put off sleep as long as possible and then hope that he would sleep
lightly enough to be warned of its approach.

He began to be thirsty. The next bubble he approached took his
attention. He stopped and watched it for a moment, then drew a deep
breath and picked it up gently. He remembered a story he had read once,
called “Goldfish Bowl,” in which two men were trapped by
super-intelligences, and got their water in globules which were
apparently made of just water: when they bit into one they could drink
what didn’t spill. Hulon was in a mood to forget everything he had ever
learned and simply to use what he saw. Accordingly he pressed his face
into the bubble and drew it into his mouth. The surface let go and the
bubble ceased to be a bubble, pouring down through his fingers. He
cupped his hands and managed to gulp heartily, twice, before all the
liquid was gone. It had a flavor something like beef extract and
something like the water in which asparagus has been cooked, and he
found it delicious. If the fluid had any ill effects, he could not feel
them. He wondered for an instant at his own foolhardiness, and then
concluded that he must have been told, before he came here, that the
bubbles were safe for him.

He began to walk, and the resumption of his attention to the corridor
brought sharply to him that something was different. It had happened
gradually, and only his transient concentration on his thirst made it
possible for him to notice the difference. It was in the light. It had
lost its greenish cast and was now pure yellow.

“—Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen,” he muttered, and looked behind him.
Nothing but advancing darkness. “One, two, three—

_“Uh!”_

The wordless syllable was wrenched from him by the glimmer ahead. It was
utterly shocking. It was a feature in the featureless triangle. It was a
new color in the dichromatic yellow and black. It was a new factor in
the lulling sameness of the corridor. And it was a dead man.

He could tell that the man was dead. It was the sparseness of the flesh
about the nostrils, the waxen quality of the wrinkled hands folded so
meticulously, the statuesque stillness, and, ever so faintly, the smell.

It was the body of an old, old man. It was laid out stiffly, ankles
together, hands folded on the thin chest. It wore a garment like Hulon’s
but without the luminescence. It glowed, but obviously by reflection,
and the color of that reflection made his eyes ache. It was red.

Hulon approached the corpse slowly and looked down at it. Was this the
death he was to meet?

No. Death was here, all right, but there was no question in his mind
that the death he sought was his own, not that of anyone else. This was
someone else who had found it. This was, if he chose to make it so,
evidence that death visited this corridor from time to time.

He knelt and put the back of his hand against the still forehead. It was
cold. Hulon stood up, stood back. Who had laid out the corpse?

Well, who had put Hulon there? These were pointless questions. He
hesitated a moment longer, and then resolutely turned his back on the
corpse and strode on. Before him was the same open blackness. Behind him
the glimmer of reflected light dwindled, and blackness paced him.
“—Twelve, thirteen, fourteen, look back. One, two, three—”

The light was changing again. When had the pure yellow taken on that
orange cast?

He determined not to think. He would watch ahead and behind. He would
notice the light. He would drink when he was thirsty and, if he must, he
would sleep. If he were to deduce the nature of the death that was here,
he wanted more evidence. If he were to find what was at the end of the
corridor, he must walk to it. Meanwhile he would not think.

The orange color was deepening, somehow—reddening. He watched as he
walked, walked, turned, walked, walked, turned. And at about the moment
he recognized it as a yellowless red, a true red, he saw another gleam
of light ahead. He was not sure how much later this was—two hours,
three—he knew only that he had been walking a long time

He slowed his pace and approached the glimmer cautiously. Last time it
had been a corpse. This time—

He grunted. This time it was a corpse, too. An old man, and again he
sensed death. This one was worse to look on than the other. It, too,
wore a short tunic, glowing with reflected light which, insanely, was
not the same color as the light which struck it. It was pure blue. That
was not the horrible thing, though. What horrified Hulon was the pose of
the corpse.

It was not neatly laid out like the other. It was tumbled rudely on the
floor, not quite in the middle of the corridor, as if it had been thrown
there. The tunic was up around its chest and one arm was crumpled
underneath in a way impossible unless it had been broken.

For years Hulon had felt that the flesh, once dead, was of little
importance, and had regarded the rituals of burial and the somber
traditions of _de mortuis nil nisi bonum_ mere carry-overs of barbarism.
In spite of this he found himself filled with horror and pity at the
sight of this poor tumbled thing. He knelt by it, turned it on its back.
An eye stared. He closed it gently, gently folded the hands and
straightened the legs, and smoothed the tunic.

He stood up, feeling, somehow, better than he had. “You take it easy
now, feller,” he said. “ ’Bye now.” He began to walk, walk, turn again.
At the first look back the corpse was a corpse; at the second, a dim
blue. At the third there was only the respectful, persistent, stalking
darkness. After that, only the unchanging, hypnotic triangle in which he
walked between shadows.

In due time his tunic was violet, and when he saw the third dead man,
the one in yellow, his tunic had turned blue.

The yellow-clad corpse was harder for him to see, somehow. Perhaps it
was weariness, perhaps it was the undefining blue which streamed around
him, but it took him some moments to discover, as he rolled and pulled
the corpse, straightening it out, that it, too, had a broken arm. This
one was heaped and tossed, worse even than the last one had been.

He stood over the body, after he had finished, and tried to think. A
bubble wandered drunkenly over to him and began to nudge the dead man.
Hulon kicked it so hard he hurt his knee. It splashed its liquid all
over the corpse’s face and neck.

“Sorry,” said Hulon abjectly. He turned away and began plodding down the
corridor, counting aloud “—Nine, ten, eleven—” By the third time he got
to “fifteen” and looked back, the darkness had swallowed up the third
corpse.

It was a long time later when he came on the next rumpled, disordered
corpse. He did not touch this one. He moved close enough so that his
light—yellow now, after an interminable shift through the greens—would
immediately fall on the fourth corpse. It was dressed in red, and had an
unnatural arm. Hulon breathed slowly, deeply, through flared nostrils.
His eyes were dull and he ached with weariness, and the soles of his
feet tingled infuriatingly from their constant contact with the strange
irresolute surface of the floor.

_If I could sleep for a while_, he thought desperately.

A bubble pirouetted into the wall and bounced. He went to it and picked
it up in widespread hands. This time he was careful and drank deeply of
it. He shook his hands and wiped them on his tunic, and sat down by the
wall to rest, and to think if he could. The taste of the bubble liquid
was good in his throat. He could feel strength pouring back into his
abused tissues. The light seemed to grow brighter, though he knew that
it was his clearing eyes that caused it. He pulled his feet in and
rested his chin on his knees, and at last thought returned to him.

_Four old dead men_. He fixed his mind on this and let everything else
disappear from his mind. Then he took them in order.

The first was dressed in red, the second in blue, the third, yellow—and
the fourth was red again. There was something about these colors that
niggled at him. It wasn’t the specific colors; it was the order in which
they appeared. There was some sort of regimentation to the colors he had
seen.

He put the thought of the dead men’s clothes aside, because, at the
moment, he could go no further with it. He closed his eyes and
concentrated. The color of his own garment—yellow-green when he awoke
here; pure yellow when he found the first corpse; then yellow-orange;
orange; orange-red; pure red. The word “primaries” occurred to him. He
caught it and held it. _Yellow is to red as red is to blue as_—He shook
himself violently. Either he was near something important or he was
delirious.

He looked at the corpse. An unremarkable old man, except for his age,
which was extreme. What mad system was behind this business of corpses
with broken arms? What point was proved, what evidence given, by a
collection of ancient and similar cadavers which were somehow associated
with the primary colors and broken arms and—and what else was it? Oh
yes; they were huddled, dumped out on the floor. Except for the first
one, of course.

Colors. A luminous garment—he racked his brains now—which changed from
yellow-green to yellow, orange, red, violet, blue, green and yellow
again. Spectral.

The light had been yellow when he saw the corpse in red; red when he saw
the corpse in blue; and—yes, and blue when he saw the corpse in yellow.
And the one he looked at now was the same as the first; the light was
yellow and the corpse was dressed in red.

Same as the first! The idea smote him—and he immediately discarded it.
There are some things one may not doubt. If this were the same corpse
over again, then one of two things was happening; the corpse was being
shifted—snatched from the corridor behind him and rushed up and dumped
ahead, and being changed in the meantime, to boot—or this corridor was
circular. The first hypothesis was ridiculous in terms of the test he
was undergoing; the people who controlled it were certainly not going to
indulge in fantastic and harmless complications just to annoy him
pointlessly. The second—that the corridor was circular—could be believed
only if he disbelieved everything his sense of balance and direction and
orientation told him. He _knew_ he had been walking on a level surface,
and in a straight line. Every sense involved told him he had.

And, yet—

He crawled to the corpse and knelt beside it. It _was_ very like the one
before. And the broken arm, and—suddenly he remembered the vicious kick
he had given that bubble, and how it had splashed on the last corpse—or
was it the last but one? He couldn’t remember, and it wasn’t important.
He sniffed at his fingers. The refreshing, meaty odor of the
bubble-liquid was still on his hands from the last time he had drunk. He
bent low over the corpse’s still, twisted face.

Unmistakably, the odor was there.

He scrambled back to the wall and huddled there. He clung to a single
conviction, that whatever was there, whether he could understand it or
not, was here by design, for a specific purpose which involved him. And
he knew now, beyond the slightest doubt, that the colors had confused
him utterly. It had taken him four encounters to realize it, and he was
almost certain that he could expect no more “evidence.” Now, of all
times, was the occasion for him to apply the philosophical analysis of
which he had been so proud. It seemed a paltry tool indeed.

Could this corridor be circular?

It seemed impossible. Even though he had walked a long way between
corpses, he was sure he would have been conscious of the arc. One or
another of the walls would have continually crowded him.

With a conscious effort he opened his imaginative faculty. He had read
fantasies in which antigravity and gravity-controlling devices had been
used. Suppose his corridor really was circular—but vertically, like an
automobile tire? And suppose, at its hub, was an artificial gravity
device. Would he not then walk in a straight line, turning neither to
right nor left, and then come back to his starting point? Such a
fantastic device would have to compensate for the Earth constant, of
course, but if he could imagine a gravity generator, a gravity insulator
was no problem.

He opened his mouth to shout his conclusion—and checked himself. _Wait_.
This was only a hypothesis, and it did not answer the two questions. It
made ridiculous the first one: “What is at the end of the corridor?” and
did not answer the second at all: “What death will you meet there?”

No: He must think of something which covered everything—the shape and
size of the corridor, the changing colors, the nutrient bubbles, the
corpses. The _corpse_.

He stared at the body of the old, old man. “You could tell me—” he
muttered. “Think—_think!”_

The corridor couldn’t be circular; it just _couldn’t_. And yet, if there
were some way—If he could only … only—He snapped his fingers. All he had
to do was mark the wall or the floor, and walk! If he could come back
upon the mark again—

“Mark it how?” he asked himself aloud. This crazy surface wouldn’t take
a mark. Moisture disappeared on it. The corpse stayed on it; he himself
stayed on it, but the resilient surface couldn’t be scratched, wouldn’t
stain.

Use the corpse as a mark, then. But—he couldn’t trust it. He found it
tumbled about, and wearing a different tunic each time.

The answer occurred to him. It had undoubtedly been in his mind for
minutes, but he could not face it. For a time he crouched there not
thinking at all. Gradually, then, he let the terrifying thought emerge.
He began to tremble.

He looked at the beckoning blacknesses. He clenched his fists and made a
sobbing sound. He rose then, and carefully bent to the corpse,
straightening the light old limbs, crossing the hands on the chest,
smoothing the scarlet tunic. “Don’t go away,” he murmured.

He peeled his own belt apart and slipped the shining yellow garment off.
Kneeling, he tucked it under the belt the corpse wore, tightening it
down until there could be no chance of its coming free by itself. Then
naked and terribly alone, he strode into the darkness.

The shadows folded themselves happily about him. He looked back. The
golden radiance from his tunic poured upward from the red-clad corpse.
And there was something wrong about the floor on which it lay.

He moved closer to the right wall, trailing his fingers lightly along it
to guide him as he walked into deeper blackness. He looked back again.
What he saw made him clutch convulsively at the leaning wall, in a
sudden attack of vertigo.

The corpse, as clear and distant as something spotlighted on a stage,
was just as he had left it. But between him and the corpse, the floor
seemed to have bellied downward, and twisted as well, so that the dead
man lay as if on a slanted deck. The slant seemed almost enough to make
the body roll, though it did not.

Hulon moved sidewise along the wall, away from the dimming light. The
floor where the corpse was seemed to be canting more and more as he
moved, and the floor between him and the body seemed to fall downward
away from the corpse and up again to him. And in a few minutes the
distant picture apparently rotated up and out of sight, and he moved
steadily forward into an unthinkable dark.

It must have been a half hour later when he began to whimper. He was
hardly aware of it at first. He ground his teeth and walked. His inner
conviction was that he had analyzed his situation correctly, and that
there was, therefore, nothing to fear. But if he were wrong—what might
be lurking in this blackness? What horror might spring at him to rip and
tear his soft unprotected flesh, or slide slimily over him, throwing
fold after fold of cold wet coils about him?

He heard his own soft whimpering and stopped it abruptly. _You are alone
here_, he told himself fervently. _There is nothing to fear_. He
stopped, slid down to the floor, huddled up in a foetal posture, to
rest. In the quiet, in a blackness so complete that he could see the
ruddy flashes of his own pulse, he forced his mind to be still.

Something cold touched his bare hip. He writhed away and screamed,
knowing in the same instant that it was one of the bubbles. His heart
thumped so hard that he was panicked, suddenly, lest it make so much
noise that he could not hear the approach of … of—_But I’m alone here_,
he scoffed.

He fumbled for the bubble, touched it, lifted it and drank quickly. The
highly nutrient solution soothed him in and out as he drank and spilled.
He rested a moment more and then rose, stretched. _Soon I should see
light_, he thought as he walked. _And if I am right, the light should be
red, and the old man will be dressed in … in—_Aloud he began to chant
softly as he walked, “Violet, blue, green, yellow, orange, red, violet,
blue, green—”

Before him, so dimly that it could easily have been a trick over his
hypersensitive, straining eyes, he began to see a loom of light. He
quickened his pace. Soon, now, he would know.

His whole body strained toward the light, and he became increasingly
conscious of the deeper darkness behind him. Almost hysterically he
blanked out the ancestral fears which crowded at his bare back and
shoulders, which increased as he increased his speed.

And now it was unmistakably light, and the light was red. Hulon laughed,
and began to run. He could see the walls now, and again could know the
shape of the corridor. Again he saw the floor sweeping down and away
from him and then up to the hidden light-source. When the source finally
burst upon his vision, he grunted and threw his arm over his eyes. He
slowed to a panting walk, slitted his lids, until he could see again.

He saw a tumbled corpse, and it was dressed in blue. Red light and a
blue tunic, and he was right! He was right!

He sprinted toward the spraddled, dead figure which, distantly, seemed
to be clinging to the wall—a wall which leaned and twisted and joined
the leaning and twisting floor under his feet. This gave him no more
vertigo, for now he understood it, and his vision was no longer in
conflict with the sense of balance and orientation which told him with
all the authority of thirty years of refined experience that the floor
was level and flat.

He pounded up to the corpse, which was, when he reached it, lying on the
level floor on which he stood. He grinned at it. “Thanks, fella,” he
chuckled. He took the luminous red tunic and slipped it out of the blue
belt of the garment the corpse wore. He slipped it over his head and
fastened it. Then he filled his lungs and shouted.

“Come get me! I have the answers!”

His voice was lapped up greedily in the echoless place. Stiffly he
waited. Then, shockingly, the light went out.

Hulon stood stiffly in the total dark. _I’ve shot my bolt_, he thought
defiantly. _There can’t be any other answer_.

Barely to be heard over his tense breathing, there was a small, steady
hiss. An acrid mist swirled into his nostrils. He tried not to breathe,
but it made him gasp, and when he did that there was a loud singing in
his ears and he fell heavily, quite conscious, quite unable to move.

The hiss ceased. Silence. Then the hum of a suction fan. The acrid smell
disappeared. He lay limply, half on his side, for minutes.

A blaze of yellow light hurt his eyes. Somewhere the wall had opened.
There were people around him. A girl—the same one he had spoken with
first, but her hair was chestnut now. And the gray-faced man, who asked
“Can you hear me, Hulon?”

“Yes,” said Hulon clearly.

“You’re ready to give the answers?”

“Yes.”

The man knelt beside him. “The vapor you just breathed will kill you in
two minutes,” he said calmly. “I have a hypodermic here which can keep
that from happening. After I give you that—if I do—you will die within
two hours. There is further treatment, of course. It’s the one you came
here for. It will kill you within … oh, say twelve or fourteen hundred
years if it isn’t renewed. Now: give me the answers, and if they are
correct, you’ll get the hypo. Give me your reasoning and if that’s
acceptable you get the final treatment. Do you understand? You will die
now, or in two hours, or not at all.”

“I understand,” said Hulon steadily. It was odd, being able to speak but
not to move.

“What is at the end of the corridor?”

“I am,” said Hulon. It—has no end.”

“What death was waiting for you?”

Hulon said carefully, “Aside from anything you might do to me, there was
only one kind of death here, as long as it was warm and I was fed. Old
age.”

The hypodermic bit into his shoulder. “Oh, good boy, good boy!” said the
girl.

They helped him up when he said his legs were beginning to tingle, and
turned him toward an irregular opening in one wall. He noticed that the
surface of the wall seemed violently agitated at the edges of the
doorway. He was half carried into a short tunnel with a steel door at
the other end. This door swung open at their approach, and they stepped
down into what appeared to be a comfortably furnished doctor’s office.
Hulon was put into an easy-chair near the desk. The gray-faced man sat
on the swivel-chair and the girl perched on the edge of the desk. She
smiled at him, and he smiled back.

“Look,” said the man, pointing to a box on his desk. It looked like a
small speaker. He flipped a switch on its side. “This is a microphone.
There are a lot of people listening. If they like what they hear, you’re
in. There’s a green light and a red light—see? I don’t have to explain
that much further, eh? Except to tell you that all votes are integrated
and it’ll take a two-thirds majority to make either light come on. Shall
we go ahead?”

“I have something less than two hours,” said Hulon wryly. “P’raps we’d
better.”

The doctor grinned. “Right. Just tell it in your own way; what you
figured out about that corridor, and how.”

“Well,” said Hulon carefully, “the easiest thing to figure out was that
it was endless—that is, it turned back on itself in some way. I figured
that it has some sort of gravity mechanism under the floor. That right?”

The girl nodded. “How did you think of that?”

“That was the only way it could have worked. It didn’t appear to curve
to right or left. And at first I guessed that it was a vertical circle,
like an automobile tire. But that idea fell down after I tied my tunic
to the dead man and walked away from it, and saw the way the corridor
twisted. The color of the light was the real tip-off. As I moved through
the corridor, it went right around the spectrum. Every time I ran into
the corpse, I found that his clothes were a different color—and his
colors changed around the spectrum, too. When I was a kid in school we
learned the colors by their initials: V, B, G, Y, O, R. Well, if you
consider those as six ‘points’ on the band, you’ll see that the color of
the dead man’s clothes were always two ‘points’ behind. On top of that,
I saw that every time I bumped into the dead man I was one third of the
way through the spectrum. So I had three ‘thirds’ to put together: I met
the corpse a third of the way through the spectrum—the corpse’s clothes
were a third of the spectrum behind the color of mine—and the triangular
cross section of the corridor. There’s only one explanation that fits
all these things, along with the fact that that poor old fellow was
tumbled all over himself each time I came on him. And it’s sort
of … hard to describe.

“Try,” said the doctor.

“Well,” said Hulon, “a while back my relief at the theater, Frank,
showed me something that kept me tickled for hours. He’d read about it
in a magazine or somewhere. He took a strip of scrap film about eighteen
inches long and put the ends together. He turned one end over and
spliced ’em. Now, if you trace that strip, or mark it with a grease
pencil, right up the center, you find that the doggone thing only has
one side!”

The doctor nodded, and the girl said: “A Möbius strip.”

“That what they call it?” said Hulon. “Well, I figured this corridor
must be something like that. On that strip, a single continuous line
touched both sides. All I had to do was figure out an object built so
that a continuous line would cover all three of three sides, and I’d
have it. So I sat down and thought it out.

“If you take a piece of clay and make a long … uh … sausage out of it,
and then form it so it has a triangular cross section; and then if you
bring the ends together and rotate one one hundred twenty degrees and
stick ’em together, you’d have a figure like that. It would have only
one side, like the … what was it?… Möbius strip.”

“Nice reasoning,” said the doctor. “You’re quite right. Incidentally, it
would have only one edge, too.”

“It would? I never thought of that. Anyway, I visualized a figure like
that, and then imagined one that was hollow, and myself inside it. Now,
as for the light, my guess is that it moved through the spectrum one
third of the way each time I went around the circle, and all the way
through the spectrum when I’d been around three times—that is, when I
reached the place where the same ‘wall’ was a floor again. I think the
walls of the corridor were a floor, one after the other, I mean.”

“That’s pretty clear. The corridor is what a topologist calls a
non-simply-connected continuous trifacial. Now, what’s your guess about
gravity?”

“I can only say _what_ was done,” said Hulon, frowning. “Not _how_. But
it seems to me that the whole corridor was somehow insulated from
Earth’s gravity, and that my feet in some way controlled an artificial
gravity in the place. In other words, wherever I walked was ‘down’. And
that effect only worked lengthwise along any side that was a ‘floor’ at
the moment. I mean, if I had turned and tried walking up the wall, it
wouldn’t have worked, even though that wall did become a floor later,
when I came on it endwise. That’s what tumbled the dead man around like
that every time I got him laid out. He’d lie nice and still until a wall
beside him became a floor, and the floor on which he lay became a wall.
Then he’d simply fall away onto what was now a floor.”

“Good!” said the doctor heartily. “And have you any idea why you always
found him dressed in a different color?”

“Not really. Unless it was just a characteristic of the material to
reflect yellow in blue light, red in yellow light, and blue in red
light. I don’t know how that could be, but I don’t know how controlled
gravity could be either.”

“All right! You’re doing fine. One more question, and we’ll have the
vote. Why do you suppose we set up the test just the way we did?”

“Why I … I imagine so you could test about everything there is to test
in a man,” said Hulon. “To see if he can analyze things he observes—even
things that are against all his previous experience.”

“That’s right,” smiled the doctor. “Including how badly he can be
scared, and still think straight.” He bent to the speaker. “Vote,” he
said shortly.

There was a tense pause, and then the green light flickered, went out,
lit—and stayed alight.

The doctor clapped his hands together delightedly, and the girl skipped
down from the desk and kissed Hulon’s cheek.

“You’re in, boy,” said the doctor. “You are right all down the line.
Antigravity is something we’ve had for a long time. The surfaces in the
corridor are coated with a substance that is in superficial molecular
motion; we used it because it can’t be marked. Your tunic is treated
with a substance that fluoresces right through the spectrum, excited by
ultra-high-frequency radio waves. And the dead man—not a real one, by
the way—had a tunic treated to do just what you guessed—it reflects
light a third of the spectrum away from the color of the light-source.
You’ll learn all about these things in time.” He rose. “Let’s get to
it.”

Hulon rose with him. He felt wonderful. “And then what?”

“Then you’ll go right back to your job, like the rest of us. You’ll
spend a lot of time with your new ‘steady,’ of course, and once in a
while you’ll attend a meeting. But by and large, things will be the
same.”

“ ‘Steady’?” asked Hulon.

The girl said, “Me,” and gave him a smile that made his head swim.

“Now this,” said Hulon, “I am going to like!”



THE HURKLE IS A HAPPY BEAST


THIS ALL HAPPENED quite a long time ago.…

Lirht is either in a different universal plane or in another island
galaxy. Perhaps these terms mean the same thing. The fact remains that
Lirht is a planet with three moons, one of which is unknown, and a sun,
which is as important in its universe as is ours.

Lirht is inhabited by gwik, its dominant race, and by several less
highly developed species which, for purposes of this narrative, can be
ignored. Except, of course, for the hurkle. The hurkle are highly
regarded by the gwik as pets, in spite of the fact that a hurkle is so
affectionate that it can have no loyalty.

The prettiest of the hurkle are blue.

Now, on Lirht, in its greatest city, there was trouble, the nature of
which does not matter to us, and a gwik named Hvov, whom you may
immediately forget, blew up a building which was important for reasons
we cannot understand. This event caused great excitement, and gwik left
their homes and factories and strubles and streamed toward the center of
town, which is how a certain laboratory door was left open.

In times of such huge confusion, the little things go on. During the
“Ten Days That Shook the World” the cafes and theaters of Moscow and
Petrograd remained open, people fell in love, sued each other, died,
shed sweat and tears; and some of these were tears of laughter. So on
Lirht, while the decisions on the fate of the miserable Hvov were being
formulated, gwik still fardled, funted, and fupped. The great central
hewton still beat out its mighty pulse, and in the anams the corsons
grew.…

Into the above-mentioned laboratory, which had been left open through
the circumstances described, wandered a hurkle kitten. It was very happy
to find itself there; but then, the hurkle is a happy beast. It prowled
about fearlessly—it could become invisible if frightened—and it glowed
at the legs of the tables and at the glittering, racked walls. It moved
sinuously, humping its back and arching along on the floor. Its front
and rear legs were as stiff and straight as the legs of a chair; the
middle pair had two sets of knees, one bending forward; one back. It was
engineered as ingeniously as a scorpion, and it was exceedingly blue.

Occupying almost a quarter of the laboratory was a huge and intricate
machine, unhoused, showing the signs of development projects the
galaxies over—temporary hook-ups from one component to another, cables
terminating in spring clips, measuring devices standing about on small
tables near the main work. The kitten regarded the machine with
curiosity and friendly intent, sending a wave of radiations outward
which were its glow, or purr. It arched daintily around to the other
side, stepping delicately but firmly on a floor switch.

Immediately there was a rushing, humming sound, like small birds chasing
large mosquitoes, and parts of the machine began to get warm. The kitten
watched curiously, and saw, high up inside the clutter of coils and
wires, the most entrancing muzziness it had ever seen. It was like heat
flicker over a fallow field; it was like a smoke vortex; it was like red
neon lights on a wet pavement. To the hurkle kitten’s senses, that
red-orange flicker was also like the smell of catnip to a cat, or anise
to a terrestrial terrier.

It reared up toward the glow, hooked its forelegs over a bus
bar—fortunately there was no ground potential—and drew itself upward. It
climbed from transformer to power pack, skittered up a variable
condenser—the setting of which was changed thereby—disappeared
momentarily as it felt the bite of a hot tube, and finally teetered on
the edge of the glow.

The glow hovered in mid-air in a sort of cabinet, which was surrounded
by heavy coils embodying tens of thousands of turns of small wire and
great loops of bus. One side, the front, of the cabinet was open, and
the kitten hung there fascinated, rocking back and forth to the rhythm
of some unheard music it made to contrast this sourceless flame. Back
and forth, back and forth it rocked and wove, riding a wave of
delicious, compelling sensation. And once, just once, it moved its
center of gravity too far from its point of support. Too far—far enough.
It tumbled into the cabinet, into the flame.

One muggy mid-June a teacher, whose name was Stott and whose duties were
to teach seven subjects to forty moppets in a very small town, was
writing on a blackboard. He was writing the word Madagascar, and the air
was so sticky and warm that he could feel his undershirt pasting and
unpasting itself on his shoulderblade with each round “a” he wrote.

Behind him there was a sudden rustle from the moist seventh-graders. His
schooled reflexes kept him from turning from the board until he had
finished what he was doing, by which time the room was in a young
uproar. Stott about-faced, opened his mouth, closed it again. A thing
like this would require more than a routine reprimand.

His forty-odd charges were writhing and squirming in an extraordinary
fashion, and the sound they made, a sort of whimpering giggle, was
unique. He look at one pupil after another. Here a hand was busily
scratching a nape; there a boy was digging guiltily under his shirt;
yonder a scrubbed and shining damsel violently worried her scalp.

Knowing the value of individual attack, Stott intoned; “Hubert, what
seems to be the trouble?”

The room immediately quieted, though diminished scrabblings continued.
“Nothin’, Mister Stott,” quavered Hubert.

Stott flicked his gaze from side to side. Wherever it rested, the
scratching stopped and was replaced by agonized control. In its wake was
rubbing and twitching. Stott glared, and idly thumbed a lower left rib.
Someone snickered. Before he could identify the source, Stott was
suddenly aware of an intense itching. He checked the impulse to go after
it, knotted his jaw, and swore to himself that he wouldn’t scratch as
long as he was out there, front and center. “The class will—” he began
tautly, and then stopped.

There was a—a _something_ on the sill of an open window. He blinked and
looked again. It was a translucent, bluish cloud which was almost
nothing at all. It was less than a something should be, but it was
indeed more than a nothing. If he stretched his imagination just a
little, he might make out the outlines of an arched creature with too
many legs, but of course that was ridiculous.

He looked away from it and scowled at his class. He had had two
unfortunate experiences with stink bombs, and in the back of his mind
was the thought of having seen once, in a trick-store window, a product
called “itching powder.” Could this be it, this terrible itch? He knew
better, however, than to accuse anyone yet; if he was wrong, there was
no point in giving the little geniuses any extracurricular notions.

He tried again. “The cl—” He swallowed. This itch was … “The class
will—” He noticed that one head, then another and another, was turning
toward the window. He realized that if the class got too interested in
what he thought he saw on the window sill, he’d have a panic on his
hands. He fumbled for his ruler and rapped twice on the desk. His
control was not what it should have been at the moment; he struck far
too hard, and the reports were like gunshots. The class turned to him as
one, and behind them the thing on the window sill appeared with great
distinctness.

It was blue—a truly beautiful blue. It has a small spherical head and an
almost identical knob at the other end. There were four stiff, straight
legs, a long, sinuous body, and two central limbs with a boneless look
about them. On the side of the head were four pairs of eyes, of
graduated sizes. It teetered there for perhaps ten seconds, and then,
without a sound, leaped through the window and was gone.

Mr. Stott, pale and shaking, closed his eyes. His knees trembled and
weakened, and a delicate, dewy mustache of perspiration appeared on his
upper lip. He clutched at the desk and forced his eyes open; and then,
flooding him with relief, pealing into his terror, swinging his control
back to him, the bell rang to end the class and the school day.

“Dismissed,” he mumbled, and sat down. The class picked up and left,
changing itself from a twittering pattern of rows to a rowdy
kaleidoscope around the bottleneck doorway. Mr. Stott slumped down in
his chair, noticing that the dreadful itch was gone, had been gone since
he had made that thunderclap with the ruler.

Now, Mr. Stott was a man of method. Mr. Stott prided himself on his
ability to teach his charges to use their powers of observation and all
the machinery of logic at their command. Perhaps, then, he had more of
both at his command—after he recovered himself—than could be expected of
an ordinary man.

He sat and stared at the open window, not seeing the sun-swept lawns
outside. And after going over these events a half-dozen times, he fixed
on two important facts:

First, the animal he had seen, or thought he had seen, had six legs.

Second, that the animal was of such a nature as to make anyone who had
not seen it believe he was out of his mind.

These two thoughts had their corollaries:

First, that every animal he had ever seen which had six legs was an
insect.

Second, that if anything was to be done about this fantastic creature,
he had better do it by himself. And whatever action he took must be
taken immediately. He imagined the windows being kept shut to keep the
thing out—in this heat—and he cowered away from the thought. He imagined
the effect of such a monstrosity if it bounded into the midst of a
classroom full of children in their early teens, and he recoiled. No,
there could be no delay in this matter.

He went to the window and examined the sill. Nothing. There was nothing
to be seen outside, either. He stood thoughtfully for a moment, pulling
on his lower lip and thinking hard. Then he went downstairs to borrow
five pounds of DDT powder from the janitor for an “experiment.” He got a
wide, flat wooden box and an electric fan, and set them on a table he
pushed close to the window. Then he sat down to wait, in case, just in
case the blue beast returned.

When the hurkle kitten fell into the flame, it braced itself for a fall
at least as far as the floor of the cabinet. Its shock was tremendous,
then, when it found itself so braced and already resting on a surface.
It looked around, panting with fright, its invisibility reflex in full
operation.

The cabinet was gone. The flame was gone. The laboratory with its
windows, lit by the orange Lirhtian sky, its ranks of shining equipment,
its hulking, complex machine—all were gone.

The hurkle kitten sprawled in an open area, a sort of lawn. No colors
were right; everything seemed half-lit, filmy, out of focus. There we
trees, but they were not low and flat and bushy like honest Lirhtian
trees; these had straight naked trunks and leaves like a portle’s tooth.
The different atmospheric gases had colors; clouds of fading, changing
faint colors obscured and revealed everything. The kitten twitched its
cafmors and ruddled its kump, right there where it stood, for no amount
of early training could overcome a shock like this.

It gathered itself together and tried to move, and then it got its
second shock. Instead of arching over inchworm-wise, it floated into the
air and came down three times as far as it had ever jumped in its life.

It cowered on the dreamlike grass, darting glances all about, under, and
up. It was lonely and terrified and felt very much put upon. It saw its
shadow through the shifting haze, and the sight terrified it even more,
for it had no shadow when it was frightened on Lirht. Everything here
was all backwards and wrong way up; it got more visible, instead of
less, when it was frightened; its legs didn’t work right, it couldn’t
see properly, and there wasn’t a single, solitary malapek to be throdded
anywhere. It thought some music; happily, that sounded all right inside
its round head, though somehow it didn’t resonate as well as it had.

It tried, with extreme caution, to move again. This time its trajectory
was shorter and more controlled. It tried a small, grounded pace, and
was quite successful. Then it bobbed for a moment, seesawing on its
flexing middle pair of legs, and, with utter abandon, flung itself
skyward. It went up perhaps fifteen feet, turning end over end, and
landed with its stiff forefeet in the turf.

It was completely delighted with this sensation. It gathered itself
together, gryting with joy, and leapt up again. This time it made more
distance than altitude, and bounced two long, happy bounces as it
landed.

Its fears were gone in the exploration of this delicious new freedom of
motion. The hurkle, as has been said before, is a happy beast. It
curveted and sailed, soared and somersaulted, and at last brought up
against a brick wall with stunning and unpleasant results. It was
learning, the hard way, a distinction between weight and mass. The
effect was slight but painful. It drew back and stared forlornly at the
bricks. Just when it was beginning to feel friendly again …

It looked upward, and saw what appeared to be an opening in the wall
some eight feet above the ground. Overcome by a spirit of high
adventure, it sprang upward and came to rest on a window sill—a feat of
which it was very proud. It crouched there, preening itself, and looked
inside.

It saw a most pleasing vista. More than forty amusingly ugly animals,
apparently imprisoned by their lower extremities in individual stalls,
bowed and nodded and mumbled. At the far end of the room stood a taller,
more slender monster with a naked head—naked compared with those of the
trapped ones, which were covered with hair like a mawson’s egg. A few
moments’ study showed the kitten that in reality only one side of the
heads was hairy; the tall one turned around and began making tracks in
the end wall, and its head proved to be hairy on the other side too.

The hurkle kitten found this vastly entertaining. It began to radiate
what was, on Lirht, a purr, or glow. In this fantastic place it was not
visible; instead, the trapped animals began to respond with most curious
writhings and squirmings and sussurant rubbings of their hides with
their claws. This pleased the kitten even more, for it loved to be
noticed and it redoubled the glow. The receptive motions of the animals
became almost frantic.

Then the tall one turned around again. It made a curious sound or two.
Then it picked up a stick from the platform before it and brought it
down with a horrible crash.

The sudden noise frightened the hurkle kitten half out of its wits. It
went invisible; but its visibility system was reversed here, and it was
suddenly outstandingly evident. It turned and leaped outside, and before
it reached the ground, a loud metallic shrilling pursued it. There were
gabblings and shufflings from the room which added force to the kitten’s
consuming terror. It scrambled to a low growth of shrubbery and
concealed itself among the leaves.

Very soon, however, its irrepressible good nature returned. It lay
relaxed, watching the slight movement of the stems and leaves—some of
them may have been flowers—in a slight breeze. A winged creature came
humming and dancing about one of the blossoms. The kitten rested on one
of its middle legs, shot the other out, and caught the creature in
flight. The thing promptly jabbed the kitten’s foot with a sharp black
probe. This the kitten ignored. It ate the thing, and belched. It lay
still for a few minutes, savoring the sensation of the bee in its
clarfel. The experiment was suddenly not a success. It ate the bee twice
more and then gave it up as a bad job.

It turned its attention again to the window, wondering what those racks
of animals might be up to now. It seemed very quiet up there.… Boldly
the kitten came from hiding and launched itself at the window again. It
was pleased with itself; it was getting quite proficient at precision
leaps in this mad place. Preening itself, it balanced on the window sill
and looked inside.

Surprisingly, all the smaller animals were gone. The larger one was
huddled behind the shelf at the end of the room. The kitten and the
animal watched each other for a long moment. The animal leaned down and
stuck something into the wall.

Immediately there was a mechanical humming sound and something on the
platform near the window began to revolve. The next thing the kitten
knew it was enveloped in a cloud of pungent dust.

It choked and became as visible as it was frightened, which was very.
For a long moment it was incapable of motion; gradually, however, it
became conscious of a poignant, painfully penetrating sensation which
thrilled it to the core. It gave itself up to the feeling. Wave after
wave of agonized ecstasy rolled over it, and it began to dance to the
waves. It glowed brilliantly, though the emanation served only to make
the animal in the room scratch hysterically.

The hurkle felt strange, transported. It turned and leaped high into the
air, out from the building.

Mr. Stott stopped scratching. Disheveled indeed, he went to the window
and watched the odd sight of the blue beast, quite invisible now, but
coated with dust, so that it was like a bubble in a fog. It bounced
across the lawn in huge floating leaps, leaving behind it diminishing
patches of white powder in the grass. He smacked his hands one on the
other and, smirking, withdrew to straighten up. He had saved the Earth
from battle, murder, and bloodshed forever, but he did not know that. No
one ever found out what he had done. So he lived a long and happy life.

And the hurkle kitten?

It bounded off through the long shadows, and vanished in a copse of
bushes. There it dug itself a shallow pit, working drowsily, more and
more slowly. And at last it sank down and lay motionless, thinking
strange thoughts, making strange music, and racked by strange
sensations. Soon even its slightest movements ceased, and it stretched
out stiffly, motionless.…

For about two weeks. At the end of that time, the hurkle, no longer a
kitten, was possessed of a fine, healthy litter of just under two
hundred young. Perhaps it was the DDT, and perhaps it was the new
variety of radiation that the hurkle received from the terrestrial sky,
but they were all parthenogenetic females, even as you and I.

And the humans? Oh, we _bred_ so! And how happy we were!

But the humans had the slidy itch, and the scratchy itch, and the
prickly or tingly or titillative paresthetic formication. And there
wasn’t a thing they could do about it.

So they left.

Isn’t this a lovely place?



STORY NOTES



BY PAUL WILLIAMS


“QUIETLY”: unpublished until now. Probably written in late 1947.
Recently discovered amidst the author’s papers in storage at the home of
his estate’s trustee. This was intended as the beginning of a novel; as
far as we know it was Theodore Sturgeon’s first start on a piece of
writing that he conceived of as a book-length novel. It is included in
this collection on the editor’s judgment that it can in fact be read as
a short story (and despite the puzzling or intriguing circumstance that
there is no evidence of Sturgeon ever having offered this unfinished
novel-start to any magazine or other possible market as a story). One
year later (late 1948) he did begin writing what became his first
completed and published novel, _The Dreaming Jewels_.

It is quite surprising, and perhaps a sufficient explanation as to why
Sturgeon did not find the inspiration or motivation/energy to complete
_Quietly_, that this first conscious effort at writing a book-length
work of fiction was not in the fantasy or science fiction genres, but
was quite unambiguously a “mainstream” (i.e., non-genre) story or novel.

The manuscript I found is untitled, and consists of 23 double-spaced
typewritten pages, with the author’s family name in the upper left
corner (indicating he was writing and typing with the idea that this
draft might someday be submitted for publication). The last page ends at
the normal page-bottom and the last paragraph ends in the middle of a
line of type, indicating that the paragraph is complete. There are no
apparently related manuscript pages among Sturgeon’s papers, and it
seems very likely that the bottom of this page is where Sturgeon paused
in this attempt sometime before writing the following comments to his
mother in a letter dated January 2, 1948:

[after a page and a half describing stories he has sold or failed to
sell to various markets and telling of recent sales to anthologies and
of his effort to sell his magazine short novel “Killdozer!” to a
mainstream publisher (Simon and Schuster) and of his forthcoming first
book (from a small specialty press, his first collection of stories,
_Without Sorcery)…_] _And then there’s my novel, if I can only get it
done. It’s called QUIETLY, and it’s about a girl who is also called
Quietly. Her father was a hermit who brought her up to be truly
self-sufficient. Just as THE FOUNTAINHEAD (Ayn Rand) deals with the
discovery of Ego as the important individual factor, rather than the
ever-popular Alter (heroes are always kind and good) so QUIETLY will
bring out the importance of We—not altruistic We; altruism is
essentially a third-person motivation; but a first-person-plural,
utterly subjective We. Quietly, at the age of eighteen, finds herself
locked out of her father’s house, naked, and eighteen years of age, and
[with] the certain knowledge that she must leave, live among people, and
stay away for a year. Her thinking is simple and functional; her success
is as complete as her unhappiness; her enlightenment comes with her full
evaluation of that We. With it comes the terrible realization that her
deified father is a twisted, sick old escapist_.

_I really don’t know if I’ll finish it this year; I intend to let it
write itself_.

It’s clear from Sturgeon’s comments elsewhere that he regarded some of
his finest and most-acclaimed stories—i.e. “Bianca’s Hands, “It,”
“Killdozer!”—as having “written themselves” in the sense that the story
flowed from him very easily as soon as he wrote the first sentence or
passed another turning point in the narrative or in the writing
experience. Evidently he had hopes that one day he would sit down to
write this page of _Quietly_ and the flood-gates would open. But this
was not to happen. Instead, at the end of the year, he found himself
writing a different and more specifically fantastic novel about the
journey-into-the-world of a young person who’d been raised by a
difficult father. Different sort of difficult, and a different sort of
novel. I will describe the somewhat strained circumstances of the birth
of that novel, _The Dreaming Jewels_, at the conclusion of these story
notes.

But what is most striking about “Quietly” is not its remote thematic
connection to _The Dreaming Jewels_ but the unmistakable parallels
between it and the opening scenes of Theodore Sturgeon’s most acclaimed
and most beloved and influential piece of writing, his 1953 novel _More
than Human_.

In light of Sturgeon’s comments to his mother (above) about “the
importance of We,” it is not unreasonable to suggest that _More than
Human_ may indeed be the novel Sturgeon had the scent of when he started
_Quietly_ sometime in late 1947. It just took a long gestation (five
years) before it was ready to write itself.

The text of “Quietly” does not in any way foreshadow the _homo gestalt_
theme of _More than Human_. Only Sturgeon’s announcement to his mother
that his intention is to explore what “We” means (subjectively) to
humans, hints at the extraordinarily powerful theme and vision that the
1953 novel _More than Human_ would explore and express.

The text of “Quietly” does bear considerable resemblance to vital (and
very powerful in establishing the reader’s relationship to the
characters of the novel and to its narrative conceit and voice) elements
of the opening scenes of “The Fabulous Idiot,” the first section of
_More than Human_. “Baby Is Three,” the middle section of the novel, was
written well before “The Fabulous Idiot,” which was written when
Ballantine Books asked Sturgeon to make a novel out of the very
well-received magazine novella “Baby Is Three.” Looking (in himself
perhaps) for the part of the story that could believably and effectively
lead up to and lay the emotional groundwork for the situation in “Baby
Is Three,” Sturgeon evidently (and either consciously or unconsciously)
found himself back in the world of “Quietly”—the young woman (in the
case of _More than Human_, women) raised by the insane, obsessive hermit
father, and her very unusual interaction with and perspective on
humanity and civilization as a result.

The nature of the two fathers’ obsessions is quite different in the two
stories; yet the similarity in the situations is remarkable,
particularly that in each case the father focuses on extreme “home
schooling” techniques—on education as well as isolation—to try to create
in his daughter or daughters his own ideal or wished-for perfect state.
(He wants to reclaim the Garden of Eden by reprogramming or reeducating
Eve, one might say.) A few noteworthy parallels between the texts of
“Quietly” and of the first section of _More than Human:_

1) Quietly’s mother and Alicia and Evelyn’s mother both die in
childbirth. _Alicia was four when little Evelyn had been born and their
mother had died cursing_ [their father], _her indignation at last awake
and greater than her agony and her fear_. When Quietly was born, _Her
father was lost in his studies.… Her mother lay still by the light of a
candle. The peak of her suffering came to her swiftly.… The breath
whistled out of her delicate, quivering nostrils; and then she decided
to draw no more, and in silence she trembled and died_.

2) Quietly is eighteen when her father locks her out of their house in
the woods and the action of the novel begins. Alicia is celebrating her
nineteenth birthday when the idiot, Lone, crawls under the picket fence
surrounding their house in the woods and her father kills her sister and
the action of the novel begins.

3) Each father is described as living in a large, isolated house and
spending a lot of time in his study with his very old books.

4) Each daughter is successfully isolated from contact with the entire
human world outside her house throughout her childhood.

5) In both texts the father’s education of his daughter specifically
includes him teaching her his definition of “evil.”

6) Sturgeon describes to his mother an intended climax of the novel as
[Quietly’s] _terrible realization that her deified father is a twisted,
sick old escapist_. This scene is actually included in _More than Human_
(ironically on this page–this page of most paperback editions), when
Alicia Kew realizes her father was mad, and curses him as her mother did
before her.

A number of themes that are important in Sturgeon’s later work surface
in this fragment called “Quietly.” The idea that “civilized” people may
be driven by their fear of being alone plays an important part in
Sturgeon’s 1953 response to/portrait of McCarthyism, “Mr. Costello,
Hero.”

In his 1/2/48 letter quoted above, Sturgeon indicates that one model or
stimulus for this non-sf polemical novel of ideas that he wants to write
is Ayn Rand’s _The Fountainhead_. In another letter to his mother (who
was living in Scotland at the time) on July 4, 1947, he tells her he is
planning to marry the singer he’s living with, Mary Mair, and writes,
_Jay Stanton, on hearing that our first child will be called Ayn (after
the remarkable author of the remarkable FOUNTAINHEAD) Mair Sturgeon,
said “Ayn Mair is e’en enow …”_

When Sturgeon in the 1/2/48 letter speaks of _The Fountainhead_ and says
his novel _Quietly_ will bring out the importance of an “utterly
subjective ‘We’ ” this can be understood as a distinction to Rand’s
widely-discussed (her novel was published in 1943) philosophy of
“objectivism.”

The word “function” turns up several times in “Quietly”: _Fear is a
functional thing, and she was happy to yield to it when it had a
function_. In still another letter to “Mum,” dated 9/25/47, Sturgeon
says in relation to his wish to get married: _I also want to make more
children, and this time do it right … they will be tall children and
graceful, with good brains and good profiles and good bodies, and by God
they’ll have a sense of values. Keynote: Functionalism. Function is a
thing which can find its place among large artificial values, as well as
the verities … hey, I’d like to tell you a codification which I have
learned from Mary Mair. This sounds easy to say, but believe me, it has
taken me nearly thirty years of reasonably intensive living to realize
fully what it means. It can be stated as an axiom and a couple of
corollaries:_

_What is important is basic_.

_What is basic is by definition simple_.

_What is complicated is therefore not important_.

See the note to “What Dead Men Tell” for more on this “codification,”
which can be found almost verbatim on the third page of “Quietly.”
Possibly Sturgeon’s difficulties in his relationship with Mair
throughout 1948 (they eventually married, briefly, in 1949) had an
impact on his ability to go on writing this novel that year.

Regarding Quietly’s efforts, when she first encounters other humans (the
girls in the lake), to recall what she had learned from her father about
“the clothing convention”: Sturgeon when he wrote this was already a
practicing nudist. TS to A. Bertram Chandler, 5/16/48: _When TAN (The
American Nudist—Phil Klass dreamed up that cute acrostic) comes out this
year I’ll do a colyum for it, the purpose of which will be to inject the
light touch as far as possible … will call it THE NAKED EYE … If
organized nudism could speak with the high-hearted idiom of its full
membership, the outsider’s view of ‘crackpot’ and ‘fetishist’ would be
quickly and forcibly revised. These are real people—a higher percentage
of true values than in any other resort group I ever ran into. What else
can you expect when people are forced to stand or fall on their merits
as people, and not because of wealth or position or origin?_

“THE MUSIC”: written in 1947 or early 1948; first published in
Sturgeon’s story collection _E Pluribus Unicorn_ in 1953.

In a letter to his Lower East Side neighbor Armand Winfield, April 12,
1948, Sturgeon wrote: _Have you made the NEUROTICA connection yet? I
have a couple more suitable yarns for them, but won’t show them any more
unless they evince some real interest. I have a pretty good potential
spot for THE MUSIC, by the way; would appreciate NEUROTICA’s prompt
report. It really is good of you to try this contact for me_.

_Neurotica_ was a New-York-based literary magazine, described by Ann
Charters as “an early counterculture magazine.” In 1950 it printed one
of Allen Ginsberg’s first published poems. This is the only instance I
know of of Sturgeon attempting to be published in a literary magazine.

The original manuscript of this story is among Sturgeon’s papers and its
text is identical to the 1953 book version, suggesting that when
Sturgeon decided to include this unpublished piece in his second short
story collection, he made no changes in what he’d written years earlier.

This story has also been published under the title “In the Hospital,” in
a mystery magazine in 1962.

“UNITE AND CONQUER”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_,
October 1948. Purchased (and presumably written) in early 1948.

In the previous volume I quoted TS in 1949 saying his story “Thunder and
Roses” _was written in 1947 out of a black depression caused by the
uncaring reception of books like_ One World or None _by a public happy
to goad the United Nations into a state of yapping uselessness_. The
plot/theme of “Unite and Conquer” presumably has similar origins. But to
understand the historical context in which readers of _Astounding_ read
this novelette in 1948, it is useful to know that _One World or None_, a
1946 book by atomic scientists trying to awaken humanity to its
post-Hiroshima circumstances, derived its title from a 1943 bestseller
by former presidential candidate Wendell Willkie called _One World_. In
Doris Kearns Goodwin’s book _No Ordinary Time_, she speaks of President
Roosevelt’s “change of heart” regarding the political acceptability of
discussing, while war still raged in 1943, the sort of cooperation
between nations that a meaningful peace would require. “His change of
heart,” writes Goodwin, “could be traced to the phenomenal success of
Wendell Willkie’s book, _One World_. No book in American publishing
history had ever sold so fast. Within two months of its publication,
sales had reached a million copies. Based on Willkie’s travels through
Russia, China, and the Middle East, the book was an eloquent plea for
international cooperation to preserve the peace.” So Sturgeon in 1947
and 1948 was disappointed that an American public that had briefly shown
great interest in the idea of world cooperation seemed to have lost
interest only a few years after the founding of the United Nations and
the dropping of the first atomic bomb. We can imagine him asking
himself, What would it take for us to overcome our emotional attachment
to nationalism?

“Unite and Conquer” is one of a number of Theodore Sturgeon stories
(“Memorial,” 1946; “Brownshoes,” 1969; “Occam’s Scalpel,” 1971) that
explore the circumstances in which one person, acting alone, might have
the power to save or awaken the world. It is reasonable to assume the
author identified with these protagonists. On April 22nd, 1939 he wrote
to his fiancee: _Here’s another feeling I have had for years, my
darling, that I may now tell you; from the bottom of my soul I have a
deep conviction that some day the consequences of something I will do or
say or write are going to have a profound effect on the entire world. In
what way I do not know; with what effect to me and mu_ [me and you] _I
do not know; but I do know that it will happen. Odd, too, since I am not
generically a revolutionist …_

He goes on to speak of the power of love: _What have you done to me,
princess consort? Look at me now! Look at what you have given me! Look
at that in which I exult! Because of you I am a Messiah. Is that too
unbelievable? But what is a Messiah? He who changes a world … no? He who
brings a great and gentle influence to bear on things about him. And why
can I say this? Because I know that I love you as you love me, and that
you have brought such a change into my world, and that therefore I have
done the same for you …_

When Sturgeon was asked in 1969 what authors had influenced him the
most, H. G. Wells was the first name he mentioned. _Wells had something
to do with it_, as Dr. Simmons tells his brother in “Unite and Conquer.”

Editor’s “blurb” atop the first page of the story in _Astounding:_ OLD
AS HUMAN GOVERNMENT IS THE FACT THAT A DISUNITED POPULATION WILL UNITE
TO REPEL THE ALIEN INVADER. BUT THAT WAS SOMETHING THE ALIEN INVADER
HADN’T COUNTED ON, PERHAPS! This story was voted best-in-the-issue in
the readers’ poll, even though its competition was the first installment
of one of A.E. van Vogt’s popular “Null-A” novels.

“THE LOVE OF HEAVEN”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_,
November 1948.

In an undated letter to Judith Merril, probably mid-1949, Sturgeon talks
of stories already written. One is called “Blight,” presumably his
original title for this story. He refers to it as _the new mystical
Sturgeon_.

A 1949 letter to TS from his young friend (and fellow sf writer) Chan
Davis says, “It’s easy for me to understand why you didn’t get charged
by ‘The Love of Heaven.’ Some of the things that are best about it are
things you do automatically, tho not usually so well: The correctness of
the characters’ attitudes & reactions; the justeness of the mots
(particularly the alien’s groping for words, which is something most
writers can’t do convincingly); the careful plot completely in accord
with the logic of the situation. On this last point, the most
impressively correct angle was the fact that the alien clearly didn’t
realize himself when he left that his people wd come back to Earth, yet
the reader can see that they’ll have to, & why, & how. Some of the
things that aren’t so good you did automatically too: The episode of the
dog, which _sounded_ automatic; & the excessive superness of the alien.
I wonder how the story wd have turned out if you’d been in love with it
the way you’ve been with some of your good stories (& some of your bad
ones).”

The word “Dalinese” in the description of the stranger departing in his
matter transmitter is a reference to the surrealist painter Salvador
Dali. Dali was a hero of Sturgeon’s, a kind of role-model. In July 1944,
TS wrote to his mother, about Dali’s illustrated autobiography, _The
Secret Life of Salvador Dali: It is totally unlike anything I have ever
read, and the illustrations are really out of this world. It is full of
the strangest kind of bragging, the most incredible sexual motivations,
and glimpses of sane, cool beauty that make you gasp for breath. Some of
it is riotous. He tells on himself—I might say he kisses and tells on
himself, with more accuracy—and throughout he dares you to call him
crazy, or a braggart, or anything else. In every instance he’s beaten
you to it, particularly when you finally find out just how much salt to
use and admit to yourself that he is a genius_.

Magazine blurb: FOR THEM, THE LOVE OF THE WORLDLY THINGS AND THE LOVE OF
HEAVEN WERE MUCH ALIKE—AND IN THAT THEY WERE FOREVER UNTOUCHABLE!

“TILL DEATH DO US JOIN”: first published in _Shock_, July 1948. Written
early 1948. Sturgeon’s original title was “The Rivals.”

TS to his mother, 7/6/48: _Sold a story to new magazine recently which
was a honey; the magazine was just what I’ve been looking for for years,
ever since UNKNOWN folded. This one did too …_ A letter to TS from Erik
Fennel, who apparently had also been writing for the magazine, says,
“That’s tough about SHOCK. Damn it, that was a good pulp with a novel
slant, and was actually beginning to pull away from a few of the usual
taboos and make something of itself. It must have been rough on you,
having it blow in your face that way.” July 1948 was the final issue of
the magazine.

In his 1953 essay “Why So Much Syzygy?” Sturgeon lists some of the
different “investigations” into “this matter of love, sexual and
asexual” that he has attempted in stories over the years, and says: _In
“Until Death Do Us Join_ [sic] _it was the murderous jealousy between
two personalities in a schizophrenic, both in love with the same girl_.
He notes that: _“Bianca’s Hands” and “The World Well Lost” cause the
violently extreme reactions they do because of the simple fact that the
protagonist was happy with the situation. No one was churned up (in
these areas) by “Until Death Do Us Join” because the crazy mixed-up
little guy was killed in the end_.

Magazine blurb: SANDRA WAS HAUNTED BY THE CHAMELEON MAN WHO STOLE A
MARCH ON PAUL—AND TOOK THEM TO A MIDNIGHT FUNERAL.

“THE PERFECT HOST”: first published in _Weird Tales_, November 1948.

In a letter to his mother in the fall of 1948, TS wrote, _Something very
nice happened to me yesterday. I have an outlet for the literary forms
of my catharses, the doughty WEIRD TALES, which doesn’t pay much but
leaves its gates open to such mouthings as I put out from time to time
when I feel that way. I had the lead in the November issue this year, a
yarn called THE PERFECT HOST. In one sequence a man grieved for his
wife, and I got a letter yesterday from South Africa containing a poem,
an epitaph for the girl. It was a bit crude, but nicely put together; at
the third reading I realized that the poet, one Desmond Bagley, had put
the whole thing together, almost without alteration, with lines from the
story. It is good to feel that something of one’s own can have not only
reflective, but creative and recreative effects_.

So we may thank the open gates of _Weird Tales_ for giving Theodore
Sturgeon the freedom to experiment with form and style—to start with,
“The Perfect Host” is a narrative told powerfully and effectively from
eight different points of view, in eight very different voices—in ways
that would have enormous impact on almost every writer of science
fiction and fantasy during the next five decades.

“Because of Sturgeon other writers have been freer to write what they
wished to write and able to find a market for it.”—James Gunn, in
_Alternate Worlds, The Illustrated History of Science Fiction_ (1975).

“The most important science fiction writer of the forties was probably
Theodore Sturgeon.… What Sturgeon did was to keep open the possibility
for a kind of science fiction that eventually many others came to do.…
In his use of style, internalization and quirky characterization he was
keeping the door open for everything that happened after 1950. If
Sturgeon had not established that the literature could be
style-oriented … no basis would have existed upon which writers within
the field could build.”—Barry Malzberg, in _The Engines of the Night_
(1982).

Commenting on Sturgeon’s 1952 story “The Sex Opposite,” James Blish
complained that Sturgeon was writing too many stories about “syzygy”
(defined in that story as _a non-sexual interflow between the nuclei of
two animals_) and said Sturgeon had already handled the subject
“definitively” in “The Perfect Host.” In a 1953 letter to the editor of
the magazine Blish’s comments appeared in, Sturgeon quoted the editor as
having said, “without sexual pleasure there would be no passionate
attachments between humans,” and then wrote: _I think that in “Bianca’s
Hands” and “The Perfect Host” and in “The World Well Lost,” and in the
remarks just quoted, we have sufficient material for the tentative
establishment of a lowest common denominator_ [in Sturgeon’s fiction].

“Sturgeon’s failures, some of them, are as triumphant as his successes;
they made the successes. Sturgeon is the most accomplished technician
this field has produced, bar nobody, not even Bradbury; and part of the
reason is that he never stops working at it. He tried writing about each
character in a story in a different meter once—iambs for one, trochees
for another—a trick, not viable, but it taught him something about
rhythm in prose.”—Damon Knight, in _In Search of Wonder, Essays on
Modern Science Fiction_.

Like such related stories as “Blabbermouth” and “Ghost of a Chance” (see
Volume III of _The Complete Stories of Theodore Sturgeon_), “The Perfect
Host” blurs the line between fantasy and science fiction by firmly
portraying the parasitic entity referred to in the title as a real
(i.e., “scientific”) energy creature which cohabits our physical as well
as psychological universe. This is the basic Sturgeon theme: what is
love? what is guilt? what is jealousy? what is curiosity? what is the
gestalt “we” that empowers and oppresses humans? His answers always
conjecture a science fictional universe in which these forces are living
entities subject to physical laws, and even capable of interacting with
the story’s characters or even, in this case, with the story’s readers.
Not only does Sturgeon break the “fifth wall” between playwright and
audience in section 7 of this story (becoming a sort of character in the
story himself), he goes further in section 8, breaking a sixth wall by
warning the reader that he or she may already have become infected by
the parasite just by reading this far. Of course he had already made a
similar radical leap and warning in the opening lines of “It Wasn’t
Syzygy” (1947). Sturgeon like Philip K. Dick doesn’t just entertain the
reader with fantastic tales, but actually corrupts/invades his or her
reality. Metafiction indeed.

“THE MARTIAN AND THE MORON”: first published in _Weird Tales_, March
1949.

Sturgeon’s introduction to this story in his collection _Alien Cargo_
(1984): _This is one of the first writings after that long period of
silence_ [1941-46; but there is reason to believe it was witten in
1948]. _Oddly enough it comes out as comedy—sheer joyous comedy for
itself, with no effort to be metaphor or anything else but itself. The
events concerning the cessation of all broadcasts during the near
approach of Mars in the ’twenties, did indeed happen; and back in those
days of newspaper articles about guys who built crystal sets into
peanuts, of 100-foot braided copper antennas enabling you to pick up
Chicago all the way from Philadelphia, late at night, of cats-whiskers
and variocouplers (anybody out there know what a variocouple is? I mean,
was?) back in those days, there was surely more than one radio buff with
flanged-up equipment like that “dad” built in his basement. As for that
girl—I think I met that girl one time at a party. Nov shmoz ka pop!_

In his 1965 childhood memoir (published in 1993 as _Argyll_), TS
describes at some length his youthful passion for building and operating
crystal radios. Certain very specific details used in “The Martian and
the Moron”—the UX-11 tube and picking up WLS all the way from Chicago
and learning later _that I probably yanked it off someone else’s
receiver by antenna induction_—also turn up in the autobiographical
account. But unlike the Dad in the story, Sturgeon’s stepfather was not
a radio bug; in fact in _Argyll_ TS tells the story of _getting in bad
trouble over one of my radios_. This occurred because he told a local
radio station about his clever rig that allowed him to keep his hobby a
secret, and the announcer broadcast _the whole story, horsehair antenna
and all. Few orgasms in my life have so transported me_. But his joy
turned to terror when he realized his parents were listening to the
broadcast in the next room. His radio and antenna system and workbench
were all taken away from him. The gruff but loving father in “The
Martian and the Moron” is strikingly different from the cruel stepfather
portrayed in _The Dreaming Jewels_, written later in 1948.

In the David Hartwell interview in 1972 Sturgeon says Cordelia _was
drawn largely from life_. The paragraph in this story where the
disillusioned narrator says, _I remember wondering smokily whether
anyone ever loves another person. People seem to love dreams instead_,
reveals that this is another in the long series of stories in which TS
tried to _investigate this matter of love_. Indeed, Sturgeon overtly
draws a parallel here between the son’s love for the Cordelia he thinks
he sees and the father’s love for his amateur science project. In
various interviews and speeches Sturgeon has insisted that his study of
“love” is not confined to sexual love but includes, for example, a man’s
love for a bulldozer.

“DIE, MAESTRO, DIE!”: first published in _Dime Detective_, May 1949.
Author’s original title was “Fluke.” We know this because that’s how the
story is listed on a handwritten list of “1948 Income” that survives in
Sturgeon’s papers. (This list also provides a basis for guessing at the
sequence in which his 1948 stories were written.) The copyright page of
_E Pluribus Unicorn_ suggests that TS intended to use the original title
when the story was included in this collection; one imagines the
publisher then talked him out of it (and forgot to correct the copyright
page).

Since I have noted that 1947’s “Quietly” foreshadows significant aspects
of _More than Human_ but not its “homo gestalt” theme, it is noteworthy
that “Die, Maestro, Die!” is explicitly focused on the idea (Fluke’s
idea) that Lutch Crawford did not die when Fluke drowned his body,
because he lived on stubbornly in the musical “unit” of his band.
Fluke’s problem is to find out what he can change in order to destroy
that seemingly immortal _gestalt_. This is as far as I know the most
specific exploration of the “homo gestalt” theme in Sturgeon’s work
before he wrote _More than Human_. It is particularly interesting that
Sturgeon’s interest in the concept evidently began with his observation
of the nature of jazz bands he encountered in the 1940s … because
members of the Grateful Dead and the Byrds and other important 1960s
rock groups have stated in interviews that the novel _More than Human_
and its description of “bleshing” was to them the best and perhaps only
description they encountered anywhere of what they were experiencing by
working as a musical/creative/social group or unit or entity. “Phil Lesh
had read _More than Human_ by the time he joined the band that became
the Grateful Dead. The book didn’t exactly provide a blueprint for group
consciousness, but it suggested to him that the possibility existed.
Still, like the characters in the novel, the Grateful Dead didn’t see
the extent of their collective potential at first. ‘We didn’t declare
it,’ said Lesh in 1983, ‘It declared us.’ ”—David Gans, in _Playing in
the Band_ (1985)

Among a pile of what Sturgeon called “maunderings” (ruminations on paper
in an effort to come up with story ideas) Noël Sturgeon and I found in a
cache of her father’s papers in his former home in Woodstock, was a
sheet of paper that evidently immediately preceded the writing of
“Fluke.” Atop the page is TS’s address (_one seventy three monroe street
new york two_) and the date (_April 20, 1948_). Then a heading: _THE
BENEKE STORY_. Under that is the following text, broken up into
paragraphs as you see here:

_Hutch is dead. Shorty Glincka, alto man, picks it up. He had been
arranging for Hutch. Hutch’s wife, Fawn, is the thrush. She just soaks
in the music from this band, which is kept as close as possible as it
always was. Hutch has disappeared; she hangs on to the idea that he
might walk in again. and the band has the same idea … there’s one guy
who is a great comfort to her—Twill_.

_Glincka gets killed by a hit-and-run driver. The orchestra continues to
play; hires an arranger. The guy quickly learns to style like Hutch; it
becomes obvious that the distinctive tone of the orchestra comes from
the instrumentalists. The guitarist gets attacked. That almost kills the
orchestra; they get a filler for the spot, though, and go on. Then the
trombone loses his lip, literally_.

_All through this Twill is holding Fawn’s head_.

_Windup: Twill killed Hutch, psychopathically thinks Hutch isn’t dead
until he can kill the distinctiveness of the band_.

_Mech gimmick: final orchestra performance where Stan’s guitar is
standing on his chair. Orchestra plays around his part; on the second
chorus the guitar comes in srong and Twill’s reaction gives him away.
Recording of selection has been made, and engineer has wiped out all but
git part; plays recording thru guitar amplifier_.

Under this is the beginning of another maundering, headed _CAT SKINNER
STORY_. So Sturgeon was still in the process of trying to find a story
that would “write itself” and be marketable, when he wrote the above. I
am certain that what we know as “Die, Maestro, Die!” did indeed write
itself once TS decided to use Twill/Fluke as the viewpoint
character/narrator, and wrote the opening paragraph.

Sturgeon’s keen interest in progressive jazz orchestras is further
demonstrated in a letter he wrote on May 11, 1948, to Stan Kenton (c/o
Capitol Records):

_Dear Stan Kenton_,

_Can you admit honestly that you have made a mistake?_

_If you can’t, then resign. Resign from your place in my estimation as a
phenomenon, as a free man among men chained, as a synonym for the
progressive, the experimental, the singular exponent of new directions_.

_In the name of quality, in the name of aesthetic consistency, of truth
at its artistic truest—admit that you have been wrong. And then in the
name of all the verities, correct your terrible error!_

_THIS IS MY THEME is a remarkable work. Lyric like that is thirstily
needed now, and the music—you know about the music, and why you do music
like that. These lyrics suit that music—an astonishing feat in itself. I
know of two works which match it—the extraordinary FACADE SUITE of
Sitwell and Walton, and THE MEDIUM of Gion-Carlo Menotti_.

_The thing that makes murder in THIS IS MY THEME is the rendition of the
lyrics by June Christy. Let this not be read as a personal criticism of
June Christy or of any of her other work; she has always justified your
judgment. But she is completely unsuited to a work of this kind. Had she
been confined to a monotone, even, she might have done the trick—that
may even have been effective, letting the words, not the diction, carry
the message, even as these black and white letters carry my message to
you. But the emotion she pretends to put into her recitatif is nothing
real; if she feels it, she lacks the ability to transmit or even to
transmute harmonically the deep beauty of those flexing, fluxing words.
What you have here, then, is an artistic offense far worse than, for
example, Freddy Martin’s treatment of Tschaikovsky; for at least
Tschaikovsky’s work has fine renditions extant for reference, while your
masterpiece has none_.

_You will not always be where you are. You will be greater or less
great, but only at this period can you reproduce the mood, the music,
the instrumentals of your curent organization. You will change, your
outfit will change—and suddenly it will be impossible to duplicate the
greatness of the almost-great thing you have done_.

_Please, then, while you can—re-record THIS IS MY THEME with someone
else doing the vocal. There are a thousand known people who could do it
adequately—and probably a hundred thousand unknowns, to whom the
assignment would be a great chance. That is a side issue, however; the
important thing is to put this astounding work on the plane it deserves.
It is being laughed at and ignored—not as were Satie and Ravel and
Honegger, for sheer difference, but for its one gaping flaw, a
ridiculous incompetence in one component part_.

_Do it at any cost, and quickly: “It is later than you think!” and
remember—THIS IS MY THEME is greater, far greater, than Stan Kenton, and
deserves his best_.

_I ardently wish to keep myself from intruding at all in this matter,
but I am compelled to say that this is written for no reason at all
except my high regard for the high roads of esthetic expression, and my
complete disgust with any “almost.” I have no nominations for this new
vocal job, and ask only that you talk this thing over with yourself
within the framework set forth here_.

_Sincerely_,

_Theodore Sturgeon_

Kenton’s reply to TS begins, “First of all I want you to know that out
of all the mail I have received, either praising us or otherwise, I
don’t think I have ever received one more sincere than yours. This I
appreciate.

“I realize fully and completely my mistake and wish there was some way
to un-do it, but it is just not possible. The current recording ban
makes recording music of any kind completely out of the question …”

Although it has often been said, by Sturgeon and others, that most of
his stories are about love, he has also written a number of major
stories that explore the nature of hatred. “Die, Maestro, Die!” is a
prime example, as noted by Betty Ballantine (his editor on _More than
Human_ and several other books) in her appreciation of TS published in
_Locus_ after his death: “Someone has said, and many have made their own
discovery, that Ted always wrote of love. I think also that there was a
perverse element in him, drawn to the scarlet thread of tragedy in the
human condition, from the haunting quality of ’Bianca’s Hands’ to the
pitiless cruelty of ‘Die, Maestro, Die!’ to the grand symphony of human
idiocy that he put together to create _More than Human_.” And by Samuel
R. Delany, in his Foreword to the second volume of this series: “Dealing
with such an awesome communion [his ongoing ‘syzygy’ theme], Sturgeon
might well want to keep himself oriented toward love. It would be rather
heady, if not horrifying, to explore that communion without such a fixed
point to home on—though a few times Sturgeon has given us a portrait of
this communion with the orientation toward hate (‘Die, Maestro, Die!’
and ‘Mr. Costello, Hero’), and these are among his most powerful
stories.”

Later in 1948, when Sturgeon began his novel _The Dreaming Jewels_, he
would return to the theme of hatred and the graphic image of the
chopping off of a person’s fingers.

“THE DARK GODDESS”: unpublished until now. This manuscript was among
Sturgeon’s papers with a letter dated June 18, 1948 from the Fiction
Editor of _Cosmopolitan_ Magazine, who says, “Dear Mr. Sturgeon: I very
much regret that your manuscript was not one of the twelve winners in
the _Cosmopolitan_ Dark Goddess short story contest. However, I think
you will be pleased to know that it was among the final hundred
seriously considered out of almost six thousand which were submitted. We
shall be glad to consider any stories which you may write in the future,
and want to thank you very much for this excellent attempt.” Together
with the ms. and this letter is a photo of the dark goddess figurine as
described in the story, so evidently the contest was to write a story
inspired by this picture/object.

On the title page, Sturgeon typed: “THE DARK GODDESS by Theodore
Sturgeon.” Under this is typed: “Subtitle:… MORE TO A MARRIAGE …”

The author’s own unconventional ideas about marriage are hinted at in a
letter he wrote to a lady-friend named Marcia on Dec. 29, 1946: _My wife
is with me always, and yet she is known to me by different names. For a
long time she wore a garment called Dorothe. My wife, who is always with
me, could be touched and spoken with through the garment called Dorothe.
My wife was with me in this form for several years, and just as there is
change in all things that are truly alive, so there was change in my
wife and in Dorothe. For three years or more they changed together, and
my wife wore the garment called Dorothe with grace and distinction. But
then Dorothe changed, while my wife followed her own growing, and the
garment began to fit badly. Not badly—differently. Dorothe was good and
my wife was good but they grew increasingly apart. As a result my wife
took off the garment called Dorothe and became invisible. She has been a
strange wife to live with since then …_

“SCARS”: first published in _Zane Grey’s Western Magazine_, May 1949.
Written in mid-1948. Sturgeon’s working title for this story was
“Chivalry.”

Lucy Menger in her study _Theodore Sturgeon_ (1981) says: “ ‘Scars’
beautifully illustrates Sturgeon’s growing sympathy for people, his
developing psychological insight, and his increasing technical
skill … His approach to sex in this story is typical of his approach to
sex in later stories: frank but without sensationalism … Many of
Sturgeon’s technical skills as a writer come together in his portrait
stories. In these, the protagonist’s subjective experience provides the
framework and tone for the narrative. ‘Scars’ is probably the prototype
of this genre.”

Theodore Sturgeon from a recorded conversation with Paul Williams, April
5, 1978: _Yeah. Sometimes not knowing is a great advantage. I sometimes
think of one of the best stories I’ve ever written—it’s called “Scars,”
a western story, remember? And years later I got ahold of a copy of the
journal of the Western Writers of America, and in there someone had
witten an article about the clichés that one does not do in writing a
western story. And virtually at the head of the list was, “A cowboy is
riding along, comes around a rock and some girl is bathing naked in a
stream. If that story occurs to you, don’t write it!” And I didn’t know
that, when I wrote one of the best stories I’ve ever written in my life.
If I had known that, as soon as the thing occurred to me I’d have said,
“No, I can’t do that.” I wouldn’t have had a story. So sometimes it pays
to be ignorant_.

“MESSENGER”: first published in _Thrilling Wonder Stories_, February
1949.

Magazine blurb: THERE IS MORE THAN ONE WAY TO SKIN A RAT—AS THE OLD
SCIENTIST DISCOVERS

“MINORITY REPORT”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_, June
1949.

In a rubric written in 1980 for an unpublished collection called _Slow
Sculpture_, TS said of “Minority Report”: _A very early story. It has
nice hardcore s-f content, but the one thing that interests me most is
the hulking wordless character on the space-ship, who looks like an ape
and thinks like a poet/philosopher. He appears again in another story
(not here) called “The World Well Lost”_ [1953] _and in another costume
in a story called “Need”_ [1960]. _This guy is very real to me—more so
than many I have met in the flesh; yet to my most intense recollection,
I have never met or seen anyone like him. I can report a blinding shock
of recognition when I read (years after “Minority”) Richard McKenna’s
unforgettable “Casey Agonistes”_ [1958].

There is a strong parallel between the themes of “The Love of Heaven”
and “Minority Report.” In the former early humanoids are separated from
their beloved homeland (our Earth) because their biochemistry is somehow
poisonous to current Earth life forms. “Minority Report” recounts
humanity’s experience of discovering in 2700 AD that it is similarly
alienated from most of the inhabited universe because we turn out to be
misfits in the cosmos, made out of antimatter. And thus forced to accept
and live with a vast aloneness.

Magazine blurb: A FASCINATING BASIC IDEA; MANKIND FACED WITH THE
HOPELESS PROBLEM OF BEING ALL DRESSED UP WITH INTERSTELLAR SPACESHIPS,
AND NO PLACE TO GO!

“PRODIGY” first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_, April 1949.
Written in fall 1948.

Magazine blurb: HE WAS A VERY STRANGE CHILD—AND A STRANGE CHILD WAS
SOMETHING THAT WORLD COULDN’T STAND. PARTICULARLY, THAT KIND OF
STRANGENESS—

“FAREWELL TO EDEN” first published in _Invasion from Mars:
Interplanetary Stories_, edited by Orson Welles, a paperback book
published in 1949 (Sturgeon’s appearance in this collection may have
been arranged by his friend Don Ward, who edited _Zane Grey’s Western
Magazine_ and did some work for Dell paperbacks; the “1948 Income” page
indicates that TS was paid $116. for this story at the end of ’48 by
“Dell—Ward”).

“ONE FOOT AND THE GRAVE”: first published in _Weird Tales_, September
1949. Written in early 1949.

William F. Nolan, in his introduction to this story in his 1968
anthology _3 to the Highest Power_, says, “One Foot and the Grave” is
full of Sturgeon’s particular magic, his humor, his poetic images, his
elfin girls, his ability to shock and delight; it is a story of fantasy
and fear, beauty and suspense. And it takes place in deep woods … the
woods of “It,” the woods of New York, the dark, surprising
mystery-brimming woods of Ted Sturgeon’s childhood.” _More than Human_
and _Some of Your Blood_ and “Quietly” are also partly set in those
woods. (See note to “It” in Vol. I of _The Complete Short Stories of
Theodore Sturgeon_ for more on the location of the woods TS experienced
as a child.) Nolan quotes Sturgeon as telling him, in a telephone
interview, that he remembers Staten Island, where he spent the first
eleven years of his life, as _a place of dark woods and mystery_.

“WHAT DEAD MEN TELL”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_,
November 1949. Written in early 1949. The title of this story was
suggested by Richard Hoen, a reader of _Astounding_ who wrote a letter
to the editor published in the 11/48 issue, praising the stories in the
11/49 issue and naming those stories and their authors. The editor, John
W. Campbell, Jr., decided to make the letter come true, and asked those
writers (Heinlein, Asimov, van Vogt, del Rey, de Camp, Sturgeon) to
write those stories. _Time_ Magazine made mention of this stunt when the
11/49 issue hit the newstands; it was thereafter known to fans as “the
predicted issue of _ASF_.”

Mary Mair’s “codification” showing that “what is complicated is not
important” (see notes to “Quietly”) shows up again in “What Dead Men
Tell,” where it is cited as being at the heart of the young
philosopher/protagonist’s philosophy. Lucy Menger, in her critical study
_Theodore Sturgeon_, is greatly provoked by this statement (“so what is
complicated isn’t important”). She calls it “an arrow aimed at the heart
of intellectualism” and says, “With that one sentence, Sturgeon sweeps
aside as of no importance all the intricacies and complexities the human
intellect can uncover.” She believes “ ‘What Dead Men Tell’ was probably
the peak of Sturgeon’s anti-intellectualism.”

“What Dead Men Tell” is one of the stories TS could be referring to in
his 1983 Science Fiction Radio Show interview when he says, _I have been
accused of inventing Velcro, which was in one of my stories about 15
years before it appeared on the market_.

One wonders if poet Michael McClure might have been influenced by this
story when he wrote his play _The Beard_, a dialogue in eternity between
Jean Harlow and Billy the Kid.

Magazine blurb: IT’S A CURIOUS THING THAT A CORPSE—A REMARKABLY
NOTICEABLE OBJECT—CAN BE OVERLOOKED SO EASILY. ONE TENDS TO SHY AWAY,
EVEN WHEN IT HAS A MESSAGE TO DELIVER—

“THE HURKLE IS A HAPPY BEAST”: first published in the first issue of
_The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction_, fall 1949. Written at the
end of April, 1949.

This was the last piece of fiction Sturgeon wrote until the beginning of
1950; in the second half of 1949 he was preoccupied with his new job in
the promotion department of Time, Inc. and writing scripts for a
television program that apparently never found a sponsor.

Anthony Boucher, coeditor of the new magazine, wrote to TS care of Prime
Press on April 14, 1949 asking if he could write (on a short deadline) a
short science fiction story “with human values, literacy and humor” for
what would be called at first _The Magazine of Fantasy_. TS received the
letter on April 23, and immediately wrote back, _It sounds like what
I’ve been looking for for years. I started to write at the time_ Unknown
_was born, and became a stf writer by default. I’d rather write fantasy
than anything else, and I can’t because I can’t market it and I have to
eat … I’d_ much _rather be known as a fantasist than a stf writer_. But
since Boucher’s letter explained the publisher felt they should have
“one pure stf [scientifiction] item” amongst the fantasy, TS did write
this science fiction story and mailed it to Boucher on April 25, with
this note:

_Here’s the HURKLE and I hope you like it_.

_I have another story in mind about Lirht and its gwiks and hurkles.
This one concerns the gwik Hvov, who was an anti-religionist fanatic,
dedicated to the destruction of the symbol of a certain sect. This
symbol was two hollow cylinders joined at the top, and the destruction
was always confined to the symbol, never to anything it might contain.
When Hvov was exiled from Lirht through space-time, he arrived on earth
and found himself surrounded by people wearing the detested symbol on
their nether limbs. He built a radiating incunabulator coupled to a
defriction lens and proceeded to dissolve the hated things wherever he
found them_.

In the mid-1950s, TS began one of his maundering sheets (efforts to talk
himself into a story idea) with the following lines:

_Oh, ye Shottle Bop!_

_Where is the light-hearted, character-filled, surprising and
make-you-feel-good attitude of the Hurkle and the Brat?… much of that
stuff, like The Green-Eyed Monster_ [“Ghost of a Chance”], _I wrote when
I was in deep trouble and worried to death. There has to be more like it
somewhere …_

“The Hurkle Is a Happy Beast” has been included in at least ten
different anthologies of science fiction stories published in the United
States between 1950 and 1989. Theodore Sturgeon was in fact, during his
lifetime, one of the most-anthologized living short story writers in the
English language.

An additional note on the circumstances of the writing of _The Dreaming
Jewels:_

Theodore Sturgeon’s first novel, _The Dreaming Jewels_ (also published
as _The Synthetic Man_), was first published in the February 1950 issue
of _Fantastic Adventures_ magazine and as a hardcover book in August of
1950. When I interviewed TS for my introduction to the 1978 Gregg Press
edition of the novel, he thought he had written it on assignment to go
with an already painted cover—but when I showed him the _Fantastic
Adventures_ cover, which is inconsistent with the novel in various
details, he agreed it couldn’t have been that cover. New information has
since become available to me which clarifies the actual circumstances of
the writing of the novel (evidently not remembered by TS when we spoke
in ’78). In a letter to his mother dated July 5, 1949, Sturgeon says:

_Last October Mary Mair and I broke up_ [later they got together again
and eventually got married], _and I went into a tailspin. I tried to
ship out and couldn’t, and spent five or six weeks doing nothing because
I was sure the phone would ring at any moment calling me to a ship.
Things began to get desperate so I got to work on a magazine novel,
working in close cahoots with the editor. I worked on it for nearly
three no-income months and it was fine with him all the way; I felt I
was justified in working on spec. It took a whole month for it to be
read at his office and it got seven “pro” votes. Then the editorial
director mysteriously and without precedent changed the policy of the
magazine and rejected it out of hand, leaving me with dispossess
notices, the gas and electricity shut off, my hospitalization and
insurance policies lapsed, a demand note and threat of suit, doctor’s
and dentist’s bills, and holes in my shoes in exchange for three months’
work. A short while later … I was hired as Assistant Circulation Manager
of the fabulous FORTUNE Magazine, a thing that had been in the works for
15 months … About three days after I went to work the accursed novel
sold to another magazine, and then I got a television show to do which
is going on the air towards the fall, DV_ [Deo volente—God willing].

So _The Dreaming Jewels_ was evidently written 11/48–2/49, probably
between “Farewell to Eden” and “One Foot and the Grave.”

Corrections and addenda:

Because the character Robin English in Sturgeon’s story “Maturity”
(revised in 1948) is so central to Sturgeon’s body of work and such a
primary influence on Robert Heinlein’s magnum opus _Stranger in a
Strange Land_, and because these notes might be the only biography this
fine twentieth century storyteller receives, I think it is worthwhile to
append here (one volume late) two paragraphs from a letter TS wrote to
his parents at age 20, April 27, 1938, which speak eloquently of the
extent to which Robin English and Michael Valentine Smith are modeled
after the real Theodore Sturgeon:

_While I am here I spend hours on Times Square. I can’t understand the
fools who blindly plow through it looking for somewhere to spend money
most of them can’t afford, when there is so much free entertainment
going on all around them. There is a new Wilson Whiskey ad that—in a
square of lights closely set like the band around the Times Building
which gives news flashes, that presents a whole animated cartoon. I
would dearly like to see the mechanism of that thing. That tremendous
Wrigley sign is still there, with its brilliant bubbling fishes. The
Salvation Army has procured a portable mike and amplifier and are there
every night distributing paperback copies of Matthew. I have taken about
fourteen of them because I get such a huge kick out of the little
brunette who gives them out; she most obsequiously and humbly thanks me
for her generosity. The last five or six times she has shown growing
suspicion; I’m going to keep it up until she says something. Don’t
disapprove; the gospels aren’t going to waste, as I leave them on the
subway. Everyone leaves tracts in the subway; I am only doing my duty_.

_Then there is the popular grand opera at the Hip. I make it a point to
meet someone interesting every time I go. I have stopped my very bad
habit of following up such acquaintances; I find it either a nuisance or
a disappointment or genuine trouble afterwards; hence I never mention my
name or my place in the world, but just try to contribute by listening.
It is of real value; since I have been doing all Pearl Zeid’s English
themes (she’s in U. of P.) I often have some knotty problem in dramatics
or dialectics or philosophy to clear up. I spot my victim: “Pardon me,
sir, but what is the difference between urbanity and sophistication?” or
“I beg your pardon, but I was wondering if censorship is good for movies
and the moviegoer.” You would be surprised at how few blank stares and
cold shoulders I get, and how many people will bunch their brows and
screw up their shoulders and attack the problem_.

[]
