[]

[]

Theodore Sturgeon, circa 1980 to 1983, wearing the “Q” with an arrow
that symbolized his credo: “Ask the next question.”

[]

eISBN: 978-1-58394-757-9

Copyright © 2010 by the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Previously
published materials copyright by Theodore Sturgeon, renewed by the
Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Afterword copyright © 1976, 1997 by
Paul Williams. All rights reserved. No portion of this book, except for
brief review, may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise—without the written permission of
the publisher. For information contact North Atlantic Books.

Published by
North Atlantic Books
P.O. Box 12327
Berkeley, California 94712

Cover photo © istockphoto.com/coolmilo
Cover design by Paula Morrison

_Case and the Dreamer: Volume XIII of The Complete Stories of Theodore
Sturgeon_ is sponsored by the Society for the Study of Native Arts and
Sciences, a nonprofit educational corporation whose goals are to develop
an educational and cross-cultural perspective linking various
scientific, social, and artistic fields; to nurture a holistic view of
arts, sciences, humanities, and healing; and to publish and distribute
literature on the relationship of mind, body, and nature.

North Atlantic Books’ publications are available through most
bookstores. For further information, visit our website at
www.northatlanticbooks.com or call 800-733-3000.

The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:
Sturgeon, Theodore.
   Case and the dreamer / Theodore Sturgeon.
        p. cm. — (The complete stories of Theodore Sturgeon; v. 13)
    Summary: “The thirteenth volume from internationally renowned
science fiction/fantasy/thriller author Theodore Sturgeon, containing
stories published between 1972 and 1985”—Provided by publisher.
   1. Science fiction, American. I. Title.
   PS3569.T875A6 2010
   813’.54—dc22
   2010019205

v3.1



EDITOR’S NOTE


Theodore Hamilton Sturgeon was born February 26, 1918, and died May 8,
1985. This is the thirteenth and last in a series that features all of
his short fiction. The stories within the volumes are, with some
exceptions, arranged chronologically by order of composition (insofar as
that can be determined). With one exception (“Tuesdays are Worse,”
1960), this volume contains stories written between 1973 and 1983, the
date of Sturgeon’s last published story. Three of the stories, “The
Mysterium,” “Seasoning,” and “Black Moccasins,” are previously
unpublished. This volume also contains a biographical essay written by
Paul Williams, editor of _The Complete Stories_, and an index to all
thirteen volumes.

As this is the last volume of _The Complete Stories of Theodore
Sturgeon_, it requires special acknowledgements. First and foremost, my
deepest thanks to Paul Williams. To have _all_ of Sturgeon’s stories
published was Paul’s personal vision, and his gentle persistence, hard
work, and encyclopedic knowledge of Sturgeon made it possible. He
started this project in 1991, and stayed with it until Alzheimer’s from
a brain injury made it impossible for him to continue. Though he could
not contribute to this final volume, I would like to dedicate it to him.
My attempt at replicating his excellent story notes is sure to fall
short of his stellar example. Those who wish to give back to him for his
lifetime of important work (for the science fiction community in
particular) should visit www.paulwillams.com in order to help Paul and
his family support his full-time care. Preparation of each of these
volumes would not have been possible without the hard work and
invaluable participation of Debbie Notkin (above and beyond the
heartfelt foreword she contributed to this volume), and our publishers,
Lindy Hough and Richard Grossinger. Thanks, Lindy and Richard, for
keeping the faith. I would also like to thank those that originally
supported the idea of this project and opened doors to make it happen:
Robert Silverberg, David Hartwell, Samuel R. “Chip” Delany, Jonathan
Lethem, and Harlan Ellison. Thanks to all those who contributed
forewords or afterwords: Ray Bradbury, Arthur C. Clarke, Samuel R.
Delany, Gene Wolfe, Robert Silverberg, Robert Heinlein, James Gunn,
Larry McCaffery, David Crosby, Kurt Vonnegut, Phil Klass (William Tenn),
David G. Hartwell, Jonathan Lethem, Harlan Ellison, Connie Willis,
Spider Robinson, Peter S. Beagle, and Debbie Notkin. Thanks also to
James Gunn, Kij Johnson, and Chris McKitterick for their support for
Sturgeon’s work.

For their significant assistance in preparing this thirteenth volume, I
would like to thank Jayne Williams, Debbie Notkin, Tina Krauss,
Elizabeth Kennedy, Paula Morrison, Eric Weeks, William F. Seabrook,
Charles Holloway, Tandy Sturgeon, Hart Sturgeon-Reed, T.V. Reed, Cindy
Lee Berryhill, Chris Lotts of Ralph Vicinanza, Ltd., Vince Gerardis of
CreatedBy, Bob Greene of Bookpeople in Moscow, and all of you who have
expressed your support and interest.

Noël Sturgeon

Trustee, Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust

http://www.theodoresturgeontrust.com/

BOOKS BY THEODORE STURGEON

_Without Sorcery_ (1948)

_The Dreaming Jewels_ [aka _The Synthetic Man_] (1950)

_More Than Human_ (1953)

_E Pluribus Unicorn_ (1953)

_Caviar_ (1955)

_A Way Home_ (1955)

_The King and Four Queens_ (1956)

_I, Libertine_ (1956)

_A Touch of Strange_ (1958)

_The Cosmic Rape_ [aka _To Marry_ Medusa](1958)

_Aliens 4_ (1959)

_Venus Plus X_ (1960)

_Beyond_ (1960)

_Some of Your Blood_ (1961)

_Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea_ (1961)

_The Player on the Other Side_ (1963)

_Sturgeon in Orbit_ (1964)

_Starshine_ (1966)

_The Rare Breed_ (1966)

_Sturgeon Is Alive and Well …_ (1971)

_The Worlds of Theodore Sturgeon_ (1972)

_Sturgeon’s West_ (with Don Ward) (1973)

_Case and the Dreamer_ (1974)

_Visions and Venturers_ (1978)

_Maturity_ (1979)

_The Stars Are the Styx_ (1979)

_The Golden Helix_ (1979)

_Alien Cargo_ (1984)

_Godbody_ (1986)

_A Touch of Sturgeon_ (1987)

_The [Widget], the [Wadget], and Boff_ (1989)

_Argyll_ (1993)

_Star Trek, The Joy Machine_ (with James Gunn) (1996)

THE COMPLETE STORIES SERIES

1. _The Ultimate Egoist_ (1994)

2. _Microcosmic God_ (1995)

3. _Killdozer!_ (1996)

4. _Thunder and Roses_ (1997)

5. _The Perfect Host_ (1998)

6. _Baby Is Three_ (1999)

7. _A Saucer of Loneliness_ (2000)

8. _Bright Segment_ (2002)

9. _And Now the News …_ (2003)

10. _The Man Who Lost the Sea_ (2005)

11. _The Nail and the Oracle_ (2007)

12. _Slow Sculpture_ (2009)

13. _Case and the Dreamer_ (2010)



CONTENTS


_Cover_

_Title Page_

_Copyright_

Editor’s Note

_Other Books by This Author_

Foreword: Theodore Sturgeon and _The Last Unicorn_, by Peter S. Beagle

Foreword: Lifelong Passion: Theodore Sturgeon’s Fiction, by Debbie
Notkin

Tuesdays are Worse

Case and the Dreamer

Agnes, Accent and Access

Ingenious Aylmer

The Sheriff of Chayute

The Mysterium

“I Love Maple Walnut”

Blue Butter

The Singsong of Cecily Snow

Harry’s Note

Time Warp

The Country of Afterward

Like Yesterday

Why Dolphins Don’t Bite

Vengeance Is.

Seasoning

Not an Affair

Black Moccasins

The Trick

Grizzly

Afterword: Theodore Sturgeon: Storyteller, by Paul Williams

Story Notes, by Noël Sturgeon

_About the Author_



FOREWORD



THEODORE STURGEON AND _THE LAST UNICORN_


Peter S. Beagle

I honestly don’t know whether he ever read it or not. We met for the
first time after _The Last Unicorn_ was published, but if he ever spoke
of it to me, I don’t remember at this remove. What I _do_ know is that
it almost didn’t get written because of him.

There are certain books that I won’t ever write, because they’ve already
been done. I’ve never been tempted, for instance, to try my hand at a
pseudo-Tolkien high-fantasy, elves-and-Armageddon epic, because _The
Lord of the Rings_ was a one-shot deal, unique and inimitable, as those
endless factory-produced trilogies keep proving. More recently, Barry
Hughart’s Master Li novels put paid to my notion of writing a book based
on a particular Chinese legend from the time of the three-quarters
mythical Yellow Emperor; and Ariana Franklin’s _Mistress of the Art of
Death_ and _The Serpent’s Tale_ completely did in my dream of setting a
novel in twelfth-century England, featuring Henry II, my favorite king.
Forget it. Absolutely no point to it. _Damn_.

And then there’s “The Silken-Swift”….

Oh, lord, “The Silken-Swift.” I read it in _Fantasy & Science
Fiction_—the class of the field then, as now—in 1953, when I was
fourteen years old. To this day, I can still quote sections of the story
by heart, and I could quote a lot more when I was twenty-seven, taking
my second shot at getting _The Last Unicorn_ right. I was so intensely
aware of that bloody classic of Ted’s, and trying so hard not to imitate
it in any way, that I wouldn’t even use the word _silken_ anywhere in my
novel. In fact, I didn’t use it at all for the next thirty years, until
the very last lines of my story “Professor Gottesman and the Indian
Rhinoceros.” I was just as conscious of it then, but in a different way,
as a sort of wave and wink to Ted—a joke between the two of us, though
he was long gone by then. I liked the notion of sharing a joke with
Theodore Sturgeon.

I didn’t know him, not as my dear friends Edgar and Mary Pangborn knew
him, in the old days in Bearsville, New York, or as did Betty and Ian
Ballantine, who lived practically next door. I can only recall meeting
him three times: first, through my playwright friend, Irv Bauer, who
introduced us, then when I visited him and his family in Woodland Hills,
in Southern California. On the third occasion, he stayed overnight with
my family and me in Corralitos, and my memory is that we actually played
a few tunes together on our guitars. I may have dates and circumstances
wrong, but I’ve been immensely vain for more than thirty years about
having jammed with Ted Sturgeon.

I’ve admired his work for well over half a century, from his astonishing
roll-call of short fiction (“Baby Is Three,” “Killdozer,” “Shottle Bop,”
“Derm Fool,” “The [Widget], the [Wadget]. and Boff,” “Need,” “Bianca’s
Hands,” “Yesterday Was Monday”) to his two legendary _Star Trek_ scripts
and his novel _More Than Human_, to _Some of Your Blood_, which even
today remains one of the best vampire stories ever. It may be altogether
unfair of me to say this, but at the time of Sturgeon’s appearance on
the scene in the early 1940s, the vast majority of even the best science
fiction was produced, with few exceptions, by writers with engineering
backgrounds of one sort or another: far less interested in the humanity
of their characters than in the rocketships they piloted and the gadgets
they employed against their encounters with somewhat more sophisticated
versions of Ming the Merciless. Ted dealt, over and over, with
loneliness and pain, human cruelty and the sudden generosity of the
human spirit, as no other writer of his milieu and time did. His was a
unique heart, and it gave birth to a unique voice.

Of those three brief times, I remember best our playing together. I
remember a strong, notably clear rhythm (did he have a twelve-string
guitar with him then?), and a particularly impish lead line, when we
switched off, to match that swift, startling grin. I was deeply affected
by what he did and who he was, and I’m grateful that I did get to meet
him. I wish I’d known him properly.



FOREWORD



LIFELONG PASSION: THEODORE STURGEON’S FICTION


Debbie Notkin

At a small convention near San Francisco in the 1980s, the late Judith
Merrill was reminiscing about Theodore Sturgeon. Paul Williams asked her
what she thought of the story “Mr. Costello, Hero.” “Not one of the
great ones,” Judy said with her characteristic certainty. “I know
because I don’t remember it.”

That metric doesn’t work for me. I don’t remember all of them, but then
they come back in sharp relief if I open a book to one, or someone talks
about it.

I can’t write about Theodore Sturgeon without writing about myself. The
fiction of Theodore Sturgeon is a lifelong passion of mine. “Lifelong
passion” may sound like a phrase from a teenage vampire novel, or
perhaps a 1940s romantic movie. For me, this one has been more like a
term used by a hermit living in the library stacks.

I was probably eleven when my father gave me my first adult science
fiction story (by Isaac Asimov). I was probably twelve when I learned
that the books on Dad’s shelves that said “edited by Groff Conklin,”
usually had a story by Theodore Sturgeon in them, and that I could read
that story from each book before I went back and read anything else. The
same heuristic applied to the library. That would have been in 1962 or
1963; science fiction was still far closer to the pulp magazines than to
the college classroom.

I didn’t buy many books until I was out on my own. I remember buying
_Sturgeon Is Alive and Well_ in paperback, from the college bookstore.
New stories, when I thought I had found them all!

It’s a vicious rumor that the reason I was partners with Tom Whitmore
for fifteen years was that he would find me uncollected Sturgeon
stories. Well, okay, it’s a vicious rumor that that was the only reason.
Tom knew that checking crumbling magazines and obscure anthologies for
Sturgeon stories was a way to my heart. He was good enough at it that by
the time Bill Contento created the first comprehensive index to science
fiction stories, there really wasn’t very much published Sturgeon I
hadn’t read. (I believed that until this series started to appear, and
Paul Williams and others dug up the really obscure early and unpublished
pieces.)

I met the man himself a few times; I was an easy target for his
legendary charm, but we never spent more than a few minutes in each
other’s company. I have the obligatory signed book with the “ask the
next question” glyph that he was so fond of. I have a clear memory of
his piercing blue eyes, and the way he flirted with me by saying sweet
things about booksellers—which was what I was doing at the time.

What interests me now about my forty-plus-year love affair with
Sturgeon’s fiction is: What drew me in? What led a twelve-year-old girl
with an extensive bookshelf at her fingertips to focus in on Sturgeon? I
can remember the frisson of pleasure looking at a contents page, but I
genuinely can’t recall why those were the stories I wanted to read. All
I can do is make guesses.

First, the man could write. I was far too young to recognize specific
stylistic tricks, but I imagine that I realized even then that his
sentences, paragraphs, and stories were smoother, and more interesting,
than most of the other men (and I use that word intentionally) whose
stories I was reading.

Second, he liked and was interested in people. I grew up in a
people-focused household, lots of guests, lots of international guests,
conversation, interaction. Sturgeon was often writing about the kinds of
people I hadn’t met or didn’t know, which was a plus. More important, I
think, is that the people in his stories seemed real: complicated,
imperfect, confused. I was confused; maybe I was looking for stories
about other confused people, not the single-minded, confident heroes I
found in most other stories of the time.

Third, he wrote about women. As a feminist adult, I certainly have
reservations about how Sturgeon wrote female characters. When I give his
stories to women who didn’t grow up with them, my friends often say
quizzically, “You _like_ the women in those stories?” But all I knew
then was that there _were_ women in those stories: Arthur C. Clarke had
no women; Asimov’s were way off the norm in one way or another;
Heinlein’s were … well, entire books have been written about that.
Sturgeon’s women were beautiful and smart, and they actually got to do
things. Some of them were even scientists! That was enough for me then;
a hell of a lot more than I was finding in most of what I read.

I can’t resist giving you a short list of favorites that aren’t in this
volume: “Bright Segment” shook me up for weeks, and has informed
everything I think about how and why humans abuse each other; “Thunder
and Roses” might just be the best anti-war story ever written (though
Kim Stanley Robinson’s “The Lucky Strike” is up there with it);
“Bulkhead” and “The Other Man” both say important things about who we
share our own skulls with; “Die, Maestro, Die!” is a chilling mainstream
story set in the big-band jazz era. I think Judy Merrill was wrong about
“Mr. Costello, Hero,” which Paul and I both consider to be one of the
best stories ever written about the lust for power. All of these can be
found in previous volumes in this series (see the index in the back of
the book to learn which stories are in which volumes).

Then there’s this book. I don’t think of this as Sturgeon’s finest
period—few Sturgeon aficionados do—but still …

“Case and the Dreamer,” “Why Dolphins Don’t Bite,” “Blue Butter,” and
“Not an Affair” are all the kind of stories I was combing early Groff
Conklin anthologies for: single stories good enough to warrant buying
the whole book, even if there’s nothing else there. And even the
smallest, most trivial stories (and this volume has some) have those
well-written sentences, those developed characters, those small
memorable moments. Sturgeon’s _oeuvre_ ranged from good to great, and if
there’s one thing this series proves, it’s that even the “only good”
stories are worth reading.

A lifelong passion is even better when shared: Paul Williams is one of
the few people I ever met who cared about Sturgeon’s work as much as
(more than) I do. Paul’s story notes for the previous volumes were a
labor of love, and a labor indeed. I deeply wish he were well enough to
finish the task; and I thank him for his insights, his patience, and his
readiness to involve me in this project of his heart.

I can’t imagine what it must be like for Noël Sturgeon, to travel a life
from being a fictionalized character in your father’s stories to being
the editor of your father’s collected stories. Certainly, I knew her
name decades before I thought I would ever meet her. She has done a
masterful job on these last volumes, and in doing so, she has brought
Paul’s and my (and many other people’s) dreams to a most satisfying
conclusion. I appreciate that more than I can say.



TUESDAYS ARE WORSE


He heard Angela’s voice as he let himself in. “… and for heaven’s sake
behave yourself tonight. Daddy’ll be very tired.”

“All right, Mummy,” said the back yard.

Les stood in the hall, his topcoat off one shoulder, his hat half
extended toward the shelf over the umbrella stand. He cursed himself for
ever having mentioned this Tuesday business to his wife. He would know
better in the future. It was one thing to get sympathy, another to stand
for these catechizing silences, this careful consideration.

He hung up his coat, and as he did so his attention was drawn to the two
new scratches on the hardwood floor. They curved around the newel,
parallel, bright, and deep. Roller skates again—Oh, what was the good of
it? What weapons do you use against such innate destructiveness and
stupidity in children, after you’ve tanned their bottoms red and
deprived them of everything you can think of that they might value?

Shuff-shuff across the kitchen. (You’d think she’d get rid of those old
slippers, or get a pair that.… He shook his head wearily. Hang on tight.
On Tuesday, the tapping of heels would annoy you as much.) “Les,
darling! You’re home already!”

She came close to him. He put his arms around her automatically. His
eyes dropped as he held her, and again he saw the scratches. He
compressed his lips to keep from mentioning them right away. Why start
out the evening with a fuss? She saw the lips, and an answering
tightness appeared between her eyes. “Again today?” she asked.

“It’s Tuesday, isn’t it?”

She took his hat. “Go on into the living room and relax. Dinner in a
jiffy. Roast lamb.”

He ignored the suggestion about the living room as if it were a
pointless joke. “Where’s Rosalind?”

“Out back.”

He should have said, “Where’s Bubbles?” “Rosalind” was a name reserved
for school, birth certificates, and stern episodes—a prelude to
punishment. Angela said quickly, “She’s been very good today.”

He ignored this, too. Angela always spoke up for the child. He marched
through the hall and across the kitchen to the windows, with their
red-and-white cottage curtains. He had wanted Venetian blinds and
straight drapes.

He peered outside. Rosalind, who was seven, was standing out there in
the dusk, talking with another little girl. Les cast a quick and
practiced eye up and down the flower beds. Everything seemed all right.
Of course, the light was none too good.…

There was the faintest of crackles behind him. He whirled. “Don’t do
that!”

“I’m sorry.” Angela said it so swiftly that it was out almost before he
had stopped speaking. She stopped pulling her knuckles, dropped her
hands to her sides. He squirmed his shoulders and opened the back door.

“Les.”

“Be quiet,” he said. “What do you want?”

“Where are you going?”

“I thought,” he said carefully, “that I would get a breath of air. Is
that wrong?”

“No,” she said tiredly. She knelt and opened the oven.

He watched her. “Why the questions? What did you think I was going to
do—spy on a couple of kids?”

She turned to face him, a two-tined fork in one hand, a basting spoon in
the other. She said, “I have no idea,” and went to the door. “Bubbles!”

It came back like an echo. “Yes, Mummy!” and then, “Last touch!” as she
thumped the other child and came pelting into the house. “Here I am,
Mummy. Hello, Daddy.” She gave him a quick smile with the lower half of
her face. She smiled like Miss Maison, the gaunt receptionist at the
office, who smiled like that at him every morning, and who did not like
him. Women. They learned their tricks early. Did them no good if you
were onto them, though.

“Wash your hands, honey. Apricot pie.” Les wondered obscurely how this
particle of menu affected the child. Angela’s “Dinner in a jiffy—roast
lamb,” had struck him as inane. Rosalind went to wash, and came back—she
seems clean, he thought—with a tuneless mum-mum-num-num which he bore
with wordless fortitude. Finally, “Let’s eat it,” Angela said with her
usual phrase.

Les wondered vaguely why he should be annoyed with any idea connected
with “always.” It was possibly because he was beginning to doubt the
“always” idea. There is no always. You may not always be master of your
own house. You may not always have a job. Angela … there seemed an
“always” about Angela, somehow, this pretty, inarticulate person who
could always have dinner on time and refused to argue. He let his mind
drift back to their meeting, where she sang. Sang.… She never sang any
more. Hadn’t for weeks, at any rate. He shrugged, watching her.

Rosalind danced around her mother as dinner was served. She had Angela’s
small wide-spaced eyes and placid brow, Angela’s carven mouth and
emotional nostrils. All this was built onto a miniature of his own
square frame.

Les took his place at the table, his eyes flicking over the setting. He
did not like his napkin under his fork. His napkin was not under his
fork. He did not like butter on his bread plate. There was no butter on
his bread plate. He exhaled, waited for Angela to begin, and started to
eat.

It was a delicious and interminable meal. Once Rosalind reached for
salt, bumped her milk glass. It teetered. Les watched it and stopped
chewing. Angela stopped breathing. Nothing spilled. Things went on.
Rosalind, who usually talked too much, too loudly, and with her mouth
full, talked not at all, and watched Les between bites.

And then Angela committed the real enormity of tactlessness. Possibly it
was an attempt—any attempt—to fill the silence with small talk. It
certainly could mean nothing—his office affairs were beyond her, or at
least he considered them so, which amounted to the same thing. She said,
“How’s Parks?”

How’s Parks. Parks, with his high forehead and large white teeth and
pleasant, unshakable secretiveness. How’s Parks, who came to his office
every Tuesday, and watched while Les entered and sub-balanced the
Stockton account—the most important account the firm had, the account
for which he had been groomed and promoted. Parks was there on Mr.
Bryce’s orders. Parks was authorized to ask any question, to question
any method. Today had been the ninth consecutive Tuesday on which Parks
had spent the afternoon with him.

Once, weeks ago, he had asked Parks why he was there. Parks was very
pleasant about it. He smiled, tapped Les on the shoulder, and said,
“You’ll find out in time, old man. I really can’t tell you. I would if I
could.”

Les could have gone to Mr. Bryce and asked him, but he didn’t dare,
because of what he might find out. He racked his brains for some reason
for which he might be fired—some little oversight in eleven years of
steady work for the firm—and could find none. But bosses didn’t need a
reason. The axe could fall at any time, on anyone. On any little man in
the firm. And now, when he had come home, relieved at last of the
pressure of the long hours with Parks, Angela was pushing it all back on
him with her “How’s Parks?”

He glared at her, a lightning glance, a bullet of a glance. He said,
“He’s fine.” That should stop it. And later, after the child was in bed,
Angela would get a very careful exposition of the uses of diplomacy.

Angela said, “Still haven’t found out why he’s been sent to your
office?”

Les put down his fork with great care. He lifted his napkin, dabbed at
his lips, put the napkin down. He looked at his hands, front and back,
and put them on the table, one at a time, one on each side of his plate.
He opened his mouth to speak. Angela closed her eyes.

Rosalind cut piecrust with the side of her fork, lifted the piece she
had cut without changing her grip. The sight had, on Les, the effect of
a relay, switching in a new circuit. Almost joyfully, he barked,
“Rosalind!”

The child jumped, blinked, and her face began to pucker up. “Be good
enough to hold your fork like a civilized human being. It is not a
shovel.”

Angela’s face became carefully bland. She reached out and touched the
child’s shoulder. “Do hold it properly, darling,” she said, her voice
like her hand, gentle. Her voice was different, though no louder, when
she said, “I knew you’d manage to find something.…”

“No trouble at all,” said Les nastily.

“All gone,” said Rosalind, still using, at seven, the first phrase she
had ever spoken. “MayIbescuzed?”

“Yes, honey. Hop into the bath, now, and come down for your good-nights
when you’re all clean and shiny.”

Rosalind slipped from her chair and ran around the table—the opposite
side of the table from her father’s chair. It was a longer way to the
door. Good heavens, thought Les, does the child think I’ll reach out and
clout her if she comes close? “Just a minute, young lady.”

Rosalind slid to a stop, paling, and put a frightened gaze up to him. In
her eyes Les could all but see a catalogue of undiscovered crimes
whisking past, as if they were printed on a revolving drum. Certainly
there must be one that he could.… Broken flowers? Good clothes torn?
Nothing spilled tonight.… Ah. Those scratches … the roller skates.
“Rosalind, I am at my wits’ end. I simply do not know what to do with
you. You are without doubt the most destruc—”

Angela clapped her hands. “Hop along, Bubbles! It’s late. Go on
now—scoot. Quick!”

Rosalind waited for no second invitation. She escaped.

Les sat absolutely thunderstruck. “Angela!” he breathed. “I was speaking
to the child.”

She rose, scraping and piling plates. “You were,” she said. “I saw you,
Les. I saw you looking for something—anything—to punish her for. You’ve
been looking ever since you got home. You went straight out to hunt for
something the instant you got in the door. Just because you have trouble
at the office.”

“You’re mad,” he said. “You’re out of your head. What’s got into you?
You’ve never come out with such a thing before!” He forced a calm, felt
for something solid in the shifting conversational ground, found it. “By
what fantastic intuitive process do you connect my discipline of the
child with any events at the office?”

“Oh—!” she said. “I get so terribly angry.” She rose abruptly and went
to the sink. She tried to busy her hands and failed.

“Do tell me,” he said icily, “about how angry you get.”

“I get angry because I can’t talk. Because every time I have a thing to
say, I cry. Oh, how I envy you your words! You always had words. I fell
in love with you and your words. Only a big man, a good man, could think
so—so clean, and have all those words.” She stopped, put up her apron
and into its folds released one high, broken sob. She tore off a paper
towel, blew her nose, threw the towel away and came back to sit opposite
him. Her face was blotched and her eyes so bright they looked sick. “I
never can say anything,” she half-whispered. “I always have to go and
cry. So I don’t talk. It isn’t worth it.”

“It is in this case,” he said. “You’ve gone too far to stop.”

“Oh, I’ll go on,” she said miserably. “Yes, I will.…” Something within
him twisted, and for a moment he wished he had not forced her, wished he
could make her stop.

She said, “I don’t think you’re big any more. If you were, you’d know
it. It wouldn’t need proving. What you were doing this evening, what you
do every Tuesday now, was to prove that you were bigger and stronger
than—than Bubbles.”

“That,” he roared, “will be just about enough of …” But she went right
on talking. He realized, in the midst of his fury, that she had started
and would not stop until she was finished. It did not matter how angry
he got. It did not matter, even, whether he listened or not. She
crouched on the edge of her chair, her head tipped oddly sidewise. Her
eyes seemed not to be seeing, and tears crept down her patchy, flushed
cheeks. And she went right on talking, crooning, almost.

“Fear means everything to you. I never knew it because I never had to be
afraid of you. I worked too hard, did too much. You couldn’t be angry at
me. Now you are afraid for your job, because of Parks. You are being
treated like a little man at work, and it makes you try to be a big man
at home. You are afraid.

“You are afraid and you don’t have to be, because there are other jobs
in town besides the one you have, and because you have done nothing to
get fired for. Fear means more to you than good sense. You are ruled by
fear and you try to rule by fear. Bubbles is the only one in the world
you think you can make afraid, and you’re not sure of that so you have
to prove it all the time. You were fine and wonderful and big, and now
you are small and afraid.”

“Stop saying that,” he said ominously.

“You are afraid,” she droned, “You are afraid.”

He rose and clenched his fist.

“Mummy?”

Rosalind entered the kitchen, glowing from her bath. She wore flannel
pyjamas and a dressing gown with a crazy zigzag pattern. She went to her
mother. “I’m clean,” she confided. “Is Daddy sick?”

Over the child’s head, Angela said, “Yes, honey.”

“Bubbles,” said Les hoarsely, “come here.”

Angela held the child’s shoulders while she searched his face.
Apparently she found what she was looking for. “Go on, cookie,” she
murmured.

Les picked up his daughter, who was stiff and puzzled. He set her in his
lap and put his arms around her. “Bubbles, tell me something. Tell me
the truth. I promise I won’t—I won’t spank you.” He cleared his throat.
“When you do something wrong, I punish you. Right?”

“Uh-huh.”

“Yes. Now, do I always punish you the same? I mean, if you do something
bad, like break flowers or spill Mummy’s perfume, do I always punish you
just as hard?”

“I guess so.”

He licked his lips. “Bubbles, this is awfully important. Tell me the
truth. Is there any time when I punish you harder?”

“Yes,” she said gravely. “It’s worse on Tuesdays.”

He made a sound that was not a word, and held her tight. He held her so
tight that she screwed up her eyes. When he released her she looked at
him. “Gee!” she said. She reached over and pulled his nose. She pulled
it twice before he could make the noise like the auto horn. How long had
it been since they had played that?

He kissed her. “Come on, honey,” said Angela. They went away and left
him alone.

The phone rang after a time. Angela was still upstairs. He took the
call.

When Angela came back, he was washing the dishes. Angela said nothing.
She got a towel and began drying.

“That call,” he said, in an awestruck voice. “It was Bryce.”

“Bryce,” she said, without anything but acknowledgment in her tone.

“He was very polite. The big boss himself.… He asked me what I thought
of Parks. I said I thought he was a good accountant. What else could I
say? Bryce … thanked me for my opinion. He apologized for disturbing me
at home. Then he told me …”

“Told you what?” asked Angela, when she could stand the choked silence
no longer.

“We’re opening a new branch in Calgary,” he said. “Until tonight only
three men knew about it—a top business secret. Parks is slated to manage
the new branch, and he’s been around learning all the ropes
from … from.…” He shook his head wonderingly, “from ‘the best men in the
company.’ ”

He looked at Angela. Her face was still, not smiling, not frowning.
“He … asked me if I wanted to manage the new branch and I told him.…”
His eyes rested on the cottage curtains, which were not Venetian blinds.
“I told him no, I like it just the way it is. He was very … relieved. He
hoped I’d say that. He needs me here. He said he had to ask me because I
deserved it.” He looked down at her tear-stung, waiting eyes, and said
again, “Deserved it.” He wagged his head and whispered, “Me.”

Abruptly he threw his arms around her, with his wet soapy hands, and
buried his face in her hair and the side of her neck. She stood
acquiescent, not helping, not hindering. He held on to her and was full
of words, bursting with words, and could find hardly a one that was any
good. He said at last, “You get afraid too.”

She nodded against his cheek without speaking.

“You’re pretty small yourself.”

“Yes.”

“No you’re not,” he whispered. “No, you’re—” But then the words deserted
him altogether.



CASE AND THE DREAMER


If, at the very moment Case died, someone had aimed a laser (a tight
one, one of the highest intensity ever) at the spot from Earth, and if
you could have hidden the beam-front for a thousand years (you couldn’t,
of course, and anyway, nobody aimed, nobody knew), you might have seen
his coffin.

It wasn’t meant to be a coffin. Ships have lifeboats when they fail, and
the boats have life belts in case they fail, and the coffin had once
answered that purpose; but now and for all those centuries, it was and
had been Case’s coffin.

It lay in lightlessness, its wide-spectrum shrieks of distress forever
stilled. It tumbled ever so slowly, pressed long ago by light long gone,
because it had never been told to stop.

Case, aged a thousand and some hundred and perhaps a couple of dozen and
a fraction (but then, do the dead grow older?), lay in the sealed
cylinder, dressed in inboard fatigues (which long ago—even in Case’s
long ago—had evolved into practically nothing) consisting of barely
enough material to carry his brassard: Senior Grade Lieutenant, and the
convoluted symbol of his service branch. Xn, it read, once you got past
the art: Ex—on many levels: exploration, extrasolar, extragalactic,
extratemporal, and more; plus the possibility matrix; expatriate,
ex-serviceman, ex-officio, exit … for on entering Xn, no man made plans
for himself—not if they involved any “here,” any “now.” Or anyone.…

An invisible, intangible something brushed the coffin, just once (for
once was enough), and there then appeared something utterly outside
Case’s experience in all the exploration, all the discovery, all the
adventure in his conscious life. It was a stroboscopic flicker which,
more swiftly than the eye could comprehend or the brain register, became
with each pulse a structure twice as large as it had been before, until
it reached a point hardly ten meters away from the tumbling coffin, and
stopped, glowing. There was no deceleration in this approach, for there
was no motion as motion is understood. With each pulsation the craft for
it was indeed a ship—ceased to exist _here_ and reappeared _there_. The
distance between _here_ and _there_ was controllable and could vary
widely; it must be so, for the approach (if it can be called an
approach, in a vessel which in and of itself never moved) doubled its
apparent size except for the last three pulses, during which its
“approach” was meters, a meter, some centimeters.

A brief pause, then a disk no larger than a saucer spun out from the
seamless hull of the vessel, hovered for a moment near the slowly
tumbling coffin, then fell back and around to match its rotation. It
placed itself near one end of the coffin and emitted a squirt of flame,
and another. The tumbling slowed and, with a third impulse, stopped.

Another pause, while emanations from the ship probed, bathed, searched,
touched, tested, checked, and rechecked. Then on the flawless hull
appeared a pair of lines and another, transverse, making a rectangle.
Inside, the rectangle the hull appeared to dissolve. The tiny saucer
moved behind the coffin and made its meticulous squirt, and the coffin
moved precisely through the intersection of imaginary diagonals athwart
the doorway.

Inside, four columns of pale orange light sprang upward from the deck,
supporting and guiding the coffin until it was fully inside, whereupon
the rectangular opening hazed over, darkened, became solid, seamless
hull again. With a brief, shrill hiss, atmospheric pressure appeared,
equalizing the outside of the coffin’s shell with whatever was inside.
Then the orange beams turned the coffin and moved it toward a spot on
the forward bulkhead that irised open to a corridor, a tall oval in
cross-section, glowing with sourceless, shadowless, pale blue-white
light. Again a doorway shut behind the coffin, and it was moved smoothly
and silently up the corridor, past a row of closed oval doors and
shuttered ports, to an open door near the far forward end of the
corridor. Here the beams checked the coffin; turned it, and slid it into
a room. It came to rest in a space between two banks of equipment. On
the left was apparently a control panel of some complex kind, though it
carried no switches or knobs, but had instead arrays of small disks
floating two handsbreaths away from the panels, each, when activated,
glowing with its own hue and with intensity according to the degree of
function. On the right was a great bank of indicators. Case (if he had
been alive) would have found the calibrations and indicators
incomprehensible.

There appeared on the walkway that now surrounded the coffin a blue man,
hooded and gloved, whose body dazzled without being excessively bright,
who seemed to be not quite transparent yet not solid, who seemed in some
way out of focus. At no time did he touch anything with his small hands,
and he moved without a stride—he seemed to glide or slide from place to
place.

He stood for a time with his hands behind him and his hooded head bent,
regarding the coffin, and then turned to the control bank. Deftly he
activated a half-dozen systems by passing his hand between the face of
the console and one after another, of the floating disks, each of which
lit up. A gate at the front of the room opened and two metal arms,
bearing a semicircle of glowing busbar, moved the length of the coffin,
down and back. The field of the curved busbar rendered the top half of
the coffin transparent. The arms retracted, the gate closed. The blue
man made his swift, touchless passes at the console and the various
glowing, floating disks faded to dark.

The blue man placed his hands behind his back and stood for a long time
regarding the body inside the coffin—the (compared with his own)
overlong arms and legs, the hint of bony ridges over the corpse’s eyes,
the heavy pectoral muscles and the flat stomach. After a time he glided
around to the other side of the coffin and inspected that view, the
hollow needles still embedded in the antecubitals, the bronze-colored,
tonsure-shaped helmet clamped to the head, at the thick hair which
tumbled around its edges, and for a long astonished while at that
phenomenon, once Case’s shame and embarrassment, later his flag of
defiance—his beard, which in the last days of his life he had allowed to
grow far past the limits imposed by Xn.

The blue man returned to the controls and set up a complex sequence.
Again the gate at the front of the room opened, and a new device
trundled out and approached the coffin. It looked like a fair segment of
a planetarium, a multiple projector studded with gimballed lenses and
the housings of small and highly diverse field generators, together with
a positioning frame and sets of folded, tool-bearing arms. The
telescopic legs arched and straddled the coffin, and positioned the
projector over it. Urged by the sure, fleet hands of the blue man, the
projector came alive with thread-like beams, some visible and brilliant,
blue, gold, scarlet; some invisible but faintly shrill in the thin
atmosphere which the room had assumed to match that inside the coffin.
These beams were probes and stimulators, pressors and tractors, gauges
and analyzers, samplers and matchers and testers.

Without pause, now, they reached their summations and took further
action. Mechanical hands searched and solved the seals. Gases were mixed
and injected while the atmosphere in the chamber was matched in quality
and kind and pressure (a process which had no effect whatever on the
blue man) and then the seals were cracked, the coffin opened. While the
body remained where it was, the opened coffin sank away to and through
the deck. Case’s corpse seemed to be floating in midair, which it was
not, for although gravity had not yet been applied, it was held from
drifting or shifting by the tractor beams, while the crouching machine
tapped the tubes from the needles in Case’s arms, severing them as the
coffin dropped away, replacing their contents with something new. The
same process was used on the small bronze helmet, all its leads
analyzed, duplicated, tapped, and the original severed and discarded. A
diathermic field adjusted the body’s temperature, through and through,
and all at once, tubed needles snaked out to the groin, the abdominal
cavity, the sides of the neck. Warm fluids began coursing through them
while pressor beams gently manipulated the joints, the muscles, the
chest.

 … and suddenly Case sat up, but you can’t sit up afloat in midair
supported by intangible columns of force and entangled by needle-pointed
tubes, electrodes, probes. Even so, his movement was so sudden and so
violent that the swift reflexes of the blue man, the built-in fail-safes
of the systems, could not prevent his wild angry flailing and his
tortured shout, _“Jan!”_ But that was as far as he got before the
massive tranquilizer hit his brain and he relaxed, sleeping.

Two tubes were gently replaced.

A broken hollow needle was extracted and another put in.

And a sleeping man is not a dead man. _Let him sleep_, said the master
computer, and the blue man dissolved away and the lights dimmed, and
Case slept.

_“Jan!”_

Tortured and hoarse, yes, but it had not been like the syllable that
tore his throat and half his mind, mingled with the continuing crash of
his chemical jets, abetted by the crush of acceleration, a multiple of
anguish and loss and terror and love and fatigue (he hadn’t known about
the love before) on that terrible launch, the last before he died. There
were the lifebelts, the coffins, side by side on the escarpment where he
and Jan had dragged them, where they had tumbled in barely ahead of
capture by the—by the—(a thought missing here: occluded, forgotten …?)
and—and—

And his craft was launched, and hers had not.

No-one, not ever anywhere, no one has been so helpless, so furious.
Programming in the escape belts was so simple it was implacable; he
himself had set up the sequences, he himself had taken the irrevocable
precaution of locking them in, of tying his command controls to hers, of
canceling any possible override. And—

And his craft had launched, and hers had not, had not, had not.

_Jan!_

Case slept on in the dimness, apparently free-floating, actually caged
by gentle, unbreakable beams. After enough hours (the master computer
knew exactly the meaning of “enough”), the sourceless light increased,
and with it, the figure of the blue man appeared and gained its
almost-density. Moving to the console, the blue man activated certain of
the telltales on the opposite bulkhead and studied them. Apparently
satisfied, he turned back, made a number of careful adjustments, and
then passed his hand behind a master-switch disk.

Immediately a deep hum began; grew in intensity until checked by the
blue man’s intangible hand, and then began to rise in pitch, fall again,
rise and steady. It began to pulsate: eleven, fourteen, sixteen
cycles … eighteen … and there it held. Then began a series of matching
tones, high harmonics, multiples, tones set apart by fractions to set up
beat frequencies; these in turn orchestrated to the heavy subsonics, the
entire structure of sound constantly self-adjusting to itself and to the
readouts connected through Case’s bronze helmet, until at last the whole
living sonority was tailored exactly to him, to the emanations of his
brain, the doorways of his mind, the subtle temporal cells, the neurons
and synapses of his brain.

Case was no longer asleep. This was something far deeper.

Something began to press against the integument of his mind, gently,
irresistibly, until it dissolved the wall and entered. It sought out
those storage cells as yet unoccupied, meticulously respecting treasures
and privacies, looking into nothing, asking only space to lay down new
learning. Once this was found, it withdrew, leaving (remember: all is
figure) a line into each compartment.

Now there swiftly flowed through these lines new knowledge and new
ideation. Language. Idiom. The ideological, analogical, mythological
underbracing of idiom. Case was given everything a colleague and
contemporary of the blue man might be expected to have, except knowledge
of himself and his current situation. That he would get in his own way,
in his own time: the ultimate courtesy.

The hypnotic sound faded. The lights changed slightly. The blue man put
his hands behind his back and waited.

Case awoke.

There is no end to the wonders of the universe, and no acrobatics of the
imagination through time and space are needed to find them. A
twentieth-century man could, if he would, spend half a lifetime in
learning all there is to be learned about a square foot of topsoil, six
inches deep. He would find animals and insects with marvelous abilities,
able to speak languages of scent as well as sound; whole generations of
aggression and defense; funguses capable of weaving nooses quick and
strong enough to snap around a salamander, ingenious enough then to wrap
and digest it. On the microphysical level are the endlessly subtle
phenomena of solution and suspension, of freeze and thaw, while the
living things encapsulate and encyst and metamorphose … no end of
wonders.

Consider then the cattle tick. Hatching in the ground, she sheds and
grows and sheds and grows some more, and sheds and mates. At last,
carrying within her the encapsulated sperm, she climbs. Eyeless, she is
yet guided to climb upward until she finds a limb-tip where she clings
until her reflexes are fired by a single, special spark: the odor of
butyric acid, which is found in the sweat of warm-blooded mammals. At
that, she leaps and, if she misses, will climb patiently again and find
another tip, and hang there waiting. She has been known to hang there
for _eighteen years_—and yet will react instantly and fully in the
presence of the one thing she is equipped to take and designed to need.
She will feed for a day, whereupon she releases the sperm she has
hoarded to the eggs she carries. She falls then and dies, and the
fertilized eggs are ready to take up the cycle.

Her life, then, is composed of instants and episodes (as is yours) and
could you communicate with her, she might recall episodes: the second
shedding, the mating, the climb, the leap, the wait, through drought,
freeze, drench, windstorm—why, that was another instant, another moment,
for during that time she could be called alive only by nearly misusing
the word; it was another instant, and less memorable than that first
plunge into warm blood.

Case’s first awakening, then, was but an instant after that terrible
launch (for he could, but would not remember the long despair during
which he gave himself to the belt’s life-support, life-suspension
systems). He might have forgone these through grief and fury had not his
own emergency programming been as implacable and unforgiving as that he
had laid onto the belts, unconscious, automatic, indelible.

(But hers didn’t launch, didn’t launch.)

Therefore Case awoke (the first time) but an instant after that terrible
wrench; therefore his hoarse cry; therefore he was the only human being
in all the universe who could remember so distant an event as the escape
from that hellish unknown planet; and to him it was not distant at all.
For such is the nature of time, that a man’s clock and a man’s soul
might give him true measurements, but the truth need not be the same. If
you are to understand Case, you must understand this.

So it was that he knew time had passed when he awoke the second time; he
knew he had been asleep. He knew he felt well and rested, and that he
was hungry and thirsty. He did not know where he was, and when he tried
to sit up he could not.

“Lie still,” said the blue man. “Don’t try to move while I get those
needles out of you.”

Case’s first disobedient reflex was to move, fast and hard. When he
again found he couldn’t, he saw the sense of it and relaxed. The blue
man made quick, sure passes at the console, and a piece of equipment
glided out of the bulkhead somewhere beyond his head, came to him,
extended glittering gentle arms and tools and drew the tubes, applied
cool creams, released, untied, removed the various devices which had
given him back his life (and all trace that they had ever been there)
while he lay wondering what language the blue man had spoken—and how it
was that he could understand it.

The equipment slid away from him and traveled to its gate in the forward
bulkhead, which swallowed it. Case lay still, looking up at the blue
man, whose hooded, concealed face could tell him nothing, but whose
relaxed, hands-behind-back pose was one of watchful waiting. Mysterious,
yes. Menacing, no.

Case moved tentatively, found no restraints, sat up. He sat on nothing
visible and, looking down, found himself apparently afloat a meter above
the deck. He had a second of vertigo, which passed as the blue man, with
instant understanding, waved at a control. Case was immediately
supported and surrounded by the soft, firm chair which faded in around
him. He sat up straight, looked at the arms, around at the back, and
then at the blue man, whose calming gesture was commanding enough, to
cause him to lean back—watchful of course, but no longer alarmed.

“Lieutenant Hardin …”

Case blinked. It was so long, even as he knew time, since he had heard
that name that he had all but forgotten it was his. It was a little like
being called by one’s middle name, never having used it publicly before.
“I’m usually called Case,” he said. “And who are you?”

A pause, then the blue man (faceless, but with a smile in his voice)
said, “There really is no simple answer to that question. For the time
being; just call me the Doctor.”

“Doctor.” The word meant the right thing as he said it, but felt
unfamiliar to his tongue and throat. “Doctor,” he said again in his own
(old) language. That felt better but he could sense it meant nothing to
the blue man.

“That’s right,” said the Doctor, “you’ve learned a new language—new to
you, very ancient to me.”

The idea of hypnogogia—sleep-learning—was not unfamiliar to Case, though
he had never experienced anything as—well, _finished_ as this. Learning
and using information by hypnogogia had always been an instant
translation (or rapid analog) process to him: think “cat” and come out
with “gleep,” or whatever the appropriate word was in the learned
system. In this case, he was thinking in the new language. Yet if he
wished to use his old one, he could merely by decision, and without
special effort. All gain, no loss.

Case closed his eyes. Did his new language have words for grief and
anger and self-detestation? Yes, it had. Gratitude? _Saved my life …_
There is this about dying anguished: that the anguish dies with you, and
the pain. What then if you are revived, and with you, the anguish? This
is what mattered at the moment, not a stupid “Where am I?” He was on a
ship, which had picked him up. Whose ship, bound for where? That
mattered too, but—not yet. Gratitude …?

There were a million questions to ask, and nine hundred thousand of them
conflicted with his conditioning: to give no information unless he must,
and on certain matters, no information at all.

“You were the executive officer on the Xn ship _Outbound_,” said the
Doctor, “an Explorer class discovery vessel launched from Terra Central
on a mission to penetrate the galactic arm and make certain experiments
in intragalactic space, among them being to test a new version of the
flicker-field mode of faster-than-light travel. A design error caused
the vessel to accelerate out of control to velocities exceeding anything
regarded at the time as theoretically possible. Compounding the
_Outbound_ disaster was the ship’s ability to gather intergalactic
hydrogen molecules for fuel, which, at the unexpected velocities, caused
an increment exceeding expenditure of fuel. The only possible result
must have been an explosion or other disruption of the vessel. What
actually happened is not known, because by the time it happened the ship
was far outside any possibility of detection.”

Case felt a flash of irritation. “If you’ve picked all this out of my
head already, why go over it?”

Gently the Doctor said, “We took nothing from you, Case. We respect
personal integrity above all other things, and the privacy of a man’s
choices are his own. No: what I have just said came from the archives.”

Archives. Not files or retrieval banks—archives. “How long were we—was
the _Outbound_, lost?”

“By Terra Central reckoning—some twelve hundred years.”

“I couldn’t have been suspended for twelve hundred years!”

“You weren’t. You died.”

After a time the Doctor said, “Would you like to be by yourself?”

“If you don’t mind,” Case whispered.

The blue man faded and disappeared: Case saw this, but could only stare
dully.

Jan. Oh, Jan …

His mind then for a while was a wordless throb. Deep in his mind, where
lives the observer all of us carry—the merciless one who stands off
watching—was name-calling: _Idiot! Sentimental slob! Why is it a greater
grief to you to know she is a thousand years dead than a mere two
hundred? And angry, are you? Angry! What are you going to do with your
anger?_

“Something,” he whispered. “Something …”

He flicked a slitted glance around. There was nothing in this bland
place to strike out against, so with one blow he fisted his palm so hard
he numbed it; and while waiting for it to begin to ache, he saw in
memory a flash of ugly laughter. It was laughter all but standing alone,
mouthless, deep, cheerful—the cheerfulness of a man with a better
mousetrap; and Case (and Jan, and Jan) the mice. Why couldn’t he
remember the mouth, the face, the situation? For he _saw_ this laugh in
memory, he did not hear it.

Occlusion—the profound will not to remember. Occlusion is an act of
survival, an unwillingness to replay some terrible shock. Yet occluded
matter always leaves a trigger in plain sight (here, a visible laugh)
and that is also a survival trait; for the deep mind wants always to
know where the danger is, and what to fear. To be as close to his deep
mind as Case was (his training had made him so) was to tread always the
edge of internal terrors, to be placed always at the point of decision:
shall I recall the trauma? or bury the trigger again?—for only at this
edge did he have the ability to react with the fabled swiftness of the
Xn Corps.

He let the trigger, the laugh, fade and closed his eyes, commanding some
alternative to come to mind. Anything. Anything else, anything instead.
Something, perhaps, before the laughter.

Something like: before the laughter was the chase, and before that the
landing, and before that the lifeboat, and before that … before that no
one would ever know, because they had abandoned ship in the flickering
grayness of translight velocity, under or over, who knew? There was no
instrumentation for that, and no instruments told the truth anyway;
electrons flowed in strange ways, coils and fields were distorted and
wild. No one had ever been there before, no probe had ever reported
back. Scuttlebutt, off-duty talk: What would happen to you if you bailed
out of a ship at faster-than-light velocities? They said, as you reach
it time approaches zero and mass approaches infinity. Achilles and the
tortoise; as logic approaches perfection, truth approaches zero. Someone
said C (the terminal velocity) was a gateway into another universe, or
another phase in phased space. Some said, death and dissolution, for all
the electrical phenomena of biochemistry would, with all the rules of
physics, be so changed that organization of matter and of life would be
disrupted. And some said no: transformation phenomena (mass into energy
into space into time, each proportionately interchangeable) might retain
_pattern_, and some inconceivably different form of life might be
possible. Over it all was the certainty that to bail out, away from the
guarding life-support, artificial gravity, and all the other tissues of
the man-made womb that was a spaceship, would be expulsion into
something utterly strange and hostile. Bailing out in the stratosphere,
with 95 percent of the atmosphere underneath one, and a temperature drop
of perhaps two hundred degrees … the name of that is Lethal. Multiply it
by what, then, in space, in that strange country where time itself might
turn on its tail?

And always the other argument: that velocity itself is not a commanding
factor; that early in the days of railroading wise men said that the
ears would bleed, the sight would fail, the blood be unable to circulate
at twenty miles an hour; and that all the talk of C was the same logical
untruth; speed has no absolute, velocity is always relative, and that
the only danger in bailing out is the matter of being a hell of a way
from anywhere.

Well, Case had found out (with Jan, with Jan) by doing it, and it hadn’t
taught him a thing, except maybe that one can live through it. Not how,
not what happened to them. The shrill alarm, the echoing-everywhere
voice saying _abandon_, the clutch of fear on the way to his assigned
lifeboat station when the mail hull started to buckle and the airtight
barrier slammed down between him and his boat (and a good thing too;
that whole section of the ship cracked away and exploded outward, boats
and all) and the lights gone, the gravity gone, the wild scramble
through familiar-unfamiliar gates and corridors to his alternate
station, where he tumbled through the hatch (on top of someone else, he
didn’t know who) and kicked out and squirmed around, treading the other
as he craned back to the corridor to see if anyone else was coming; but
then, you couldn’t _see_. If there was or was not, his conscience was
clear (though his regret could never be) for the automatic override
canceled his manual launch controls, and he fell back into the lifeboat
as it clanged shut and banged away from the ship. The boat’s
inertia-field took over at launch and saved them the terrible agony of
acceleration, but its vibratory effect, chiming down the scale, was an
agony of its own. His shipmate was as preoccupied with this as he, and
the only thing he could clearly recall was a spinning glimpse of the
ship with a ragged cavity in its midsection—the first part to blow off,
the part that had contained his lifeboat station—limned in flickering
arcs as the ruptured power cables lashed and vomited.

Probably they were both unconscious for a time. Case remembered a hazy
inspection of the instruments, which had no useful information for him
at all, except that the craft was sound and that its converter was
picking up a reasonable amount of usable atomic hydrogen, so that fuel
and life-support would not be a problem. Almost detachedly he watched
his hands on the controls, running through the implanted checklist,
setting the computer to hunt for a ship and/or a terrestrial planet, the
drive to maximum (the computer would not use maximum, but in that
setting, max. was available), and the life-support complex: on, with
alarms. A touch on one control took inventory of all stores and reported
them complete. Another applied spin. The lifeboat had the contours of a
shark with an exaggerated dorsal fin. The body contained stores,
converters, fuel; the fin was instrumentation and living quarters for
six. Spin was on the long axis; subjective “down” was therefore in the
tip of the fin.

All snug, all safe.

No hope.

Plenty of room, plenty of food and air for six. With two, it was
palatial.

He looked at last at the other one—not that he hadn’t cared before, but
because his ingrained priorities were condition first, personnel second.

His first reaction had to do with all the people it wasn’t. It wasn’t
Old Growl, the captain, or that funny little Henny from the black gang,
or Bowker, who had always puzzled him and whom he’d always wanted to
know better when he could get around to it, or Mary Dee, who had never
found out that he had liked her better walking away, such was her hair,
such was her face. This was one of the background faces, one of the
others, you know, the people that make up the bulk of the roster in your
memory of one or another school you went to once. Gander, Dancer,
something like that. Janssen. XBC, xenobiochemist, usually found in a
corner with two or three others from Science Section, talking shop.
Correction. Listening to other people talking shop.

“Janifer?”

“Janocek.” She sat with an elbow hooked around a soft stanchion, where
she had anchored herself before spin. She had apparently been watching
the checkout intently, following it step by step. Case outranked her;
the conditioning would defer to him but make her miss nothing of the
routine. Clearly, at this moment they both felt the weight of the
programming leave them. Optimum conditioning takes care of
essentials—down to the finest detail, true—but then it stops. They were
on their own.

“Case Hardin, Lieutenant S.G.,” he said.

“Yes, sir, I know.” There was a foolish pause. He should have known she
knew. There were more ratings than officers on a ship. To the ratings,
the officers were never a, well, sea of faces. And his “S.G.” hung
pompously in the air between them. Her eyes were long almonds, so bright
they were opaque (but, one realized, not from the inside), and her hair
was drawn back almost painfully tight from a seamless brow. She was
slender, tall (both just this side of “too”), and there was an odd,
controlled quality in her voice, as if it were kept in the middle
register by a conscious effort. She asked, “What happened?”

He shrugged and nodded at the telltales. No ship, no boats, no planet,
no sun anywhere. Some debris, dwindling as their launch took them away;
nothing large enough to have saved or sheltered anyone, else the
computer would have it reported. As they spun, a paleness washed across
the screens: the end of the arm of a distant galaxy. Case touched a
control and fixed a view of it. “Nobody tells the ratings anything,” she
observed.

“They don’t tell a lieutenant much either. We were testing a new drive.
Theoretically it wouldn’t work in gravitic fields of a certain density,
so we headed for deep space with a conventional drive. By the numbers,
we were okay; the math section gave us a factor of safety of three or
better; I mean, we were three times as far into intergalactic space as
we needed to be safe. Well—they were wrong, or the design was wrong, or
they did something wrong on the bridge. They cut in the new drive, and
couldn’t turn it off. Nothing could turn it off. It was working outside
our power supply, beyond control. We just accelerated until we broke
up.”

“And there’s no one—”

“No one.”

They found themselves looking at one another. What was happening behind
the shine of those long eyes? _Why you?_ Or was she mourning someone?
For a second he had a deep flash of regret; he did not gossip, he did
not pry, he never watched other people’s affections and partnerings and
personal peccadillos. Case had a searching and hungry mind, but it was
pointed at the job, the responsibility, the mission; a deliberate
repression of his own wants and an earnest subjugation to those of his
superiors, and theirs. He was a good officer. Whether or not he was
known as a good man had never concerned him. And … perhaps it need not
concern him now. He was half the population, and the ranking half at
that. There wasn’t anyone else for her to set standards and comparisons
by, and from the looks of things, there wouldn’t be. He sighed (why?)
and turned away from her. He had nothing to recollect about her. He
would have to start knowing her from scratch, from this point forward,
while she … well, she knew who he was. In his world, one was used to
living in close quarters with other people—there were so many of them,
everywhere. But because there were so many, there was always a choice.
But now …

He turned to the console, latched out the saddle and sat down. He stared
glumly at the faint stain of stardust that was a galaxy—who knew which
one—and the blackness everywhere else—and hopelessly set up the
computation for its distance. Eight hundred light-years, nine? Something
like that, surely. The boat could accelerate to a fraction of C—a large
fraction, to be sure, but still a fraction—and the suspension gear might
keep them alive for a minimum of two, a maximum five hundred years.

Of course, the boat was equipped to care for six; but could the
life-suspension systems be manifolded, so that they could revive and use
new gear before the old ones were played out? Would the unused systems
be effective after that length of time?

He glanced over his shoulder. His biochemist might have some answers.
But first—some numbers.

Expertly he flicked the computer commands, demanding the range and
distance of the nearest planetary body. In scanning a galactic cloud,
even at eight hundred light-years, the computer could only operate in an
area of probability—to lay in a course to a point in the cloud where
terrestrial planets were most likely to be, and terrestrial planets are
not _likely_ to be anywhere. He set the computer to seeking, and turned
away from it. He had at last done everything he could, and he hated
that, dreaded it. There was now nothing left but to face the whole
matrix of things he had never concerned himself with nor trained himself
for; for which no conditioning had ever been offered him and for which a
single word—infrarational—had been a big enough discard bag for him. He
was trained to confront problems, not people, not a person, not, for
that matter, himself. He turned to confront it, her, himself, and she
was crying, and she said, “We’re going to die, aren’t we?”

Everything about her, body and voice and eyes, asked only a simple
answer, a denial, and he didn’t have it for her. He never thought of
lying (that’s for those who knew more about people than he knew) and it
never occurred to him to touch her, which would have served quite well,
for she could have made her own interpretation. He said, “I guess so,
Janifer,” and even got her name wrong.

“Doctor.”

The sourceless light increased and the blue man appeared. “I’m hungry,”
Case said.

“In the chair,” said the Doctor. “Are you feeling better?”

Case knew what the Doctor knew from the wide array of telltales, and
that it was not his physical condition that was the subject of the
query. But “better”?

He said, “After the ship broke up I escaped in a lifeboat with a rating,
a Janet Janocek, xenomicrobiologist.” The wide soft arm of the chair
slitted open and uncovered a one-liter warm sucker. Like the wheel and
the needle, the sucker’s design is impervious to centuries. He pulled
strongly at it and swallowed. It was bland (he could understand this;
tastes do change, and the whole posture of his—captor?—host? was to
present, not to enforce) but satisfying. He eyed it and had another
pull. He said, “I can’t remember what happened after we realized we were
beyond help, out of range, with no reason to hope.”

“You were picked up in a ’belt—you called it a coffin. What happened to
the lifeboat?”

“Oh, that was smashed up on the landing.”

The Doctor did not comment, but waited. Case said, “I mean, I can’t
remember what we did all those days, 104 of them.…” What he meant was
that he wanted to remember them in order, every hour and minute, because
now they were precious, priceless, and because now he could not
understand why, except for, certain vivid scenes, they were at the time
a succession of gray on grays to be lived through. Because this was
_Jan_ he was with, _Jan_. Whatever she was later, she did not become:
she _was_ that, was when he watched her cry that once, sat watching her
with his useless hands pressed between his knees, miserably, watching
her cry until she stopped. Then the days … ship’s time said they were
days; and you can sleep just so much and spend so much time in the
tingler (had she used everything in the tingler? He had. Oh, Jan!) and
then you check the console and enter “Ditto” in the log, and then
there’s nothing else to do but confront the other person and you just
don’t know how!

And all the while, he thought with a kind of awe, this was Jan. Thus it
is when anguish and grief loop back on themselves. He wished he had it
to do over, terror and hopelessness and all; a small price for those 104
days, now that he knew who she was. Had been.

“I remember,” said Case, almost smiling, “Jan’s starting a discussion
with me about living, about staying alive—about _why_. Why did we keep a
log and check the console and do the active and passive exercises and
the tingler and all—why, when we knew we were going to die? And all I
could say was, what’s changed? What’s the difference, really, between
what we were doing and what we had always done? We knew where we were
going to die—right in that lifeboat, when the time came, but otherwise
we were just like everyone else, everywhere, trying to stay alive as
long as possible. I knew she hadn’t wanted to die a hundred days ago and
I knew she didn’t want to die this minute, and neither did I. But why
now? She demanded an answer to that; it was just something she didn’t
know. And I said I didn’t know either, but that everyone ever born has
been under a death sentence just for having been born, and the fact that
for us there was no hope did not change anything; hope makes life easier
but it does not make life impossible; millions upon millions have lived
long lives without it. And this discussion was on the hundred and second
day, and the hooter started up.” And at last Case did smile.

“The hooter.”

“Collision alarm, condition yellow. Somehow out there we were coming up
on something, or something was coming up on us. It was enormous, it
shouldn’t have appeared as it did, so close and without previous
warning, but it did, and don’t ask me for explanations.

“It was a planet, larger than Luna and almost as large as Terra. I
shouldn’t have said ‘planet’ because there was no primary, but you’ll
understand why I call it that.

“I thought Jan would cry again. Maybe she did. I was busy at the
console.

“I probed for atmosphere—the object was big enough. Negative. I got it
on the screen, and read the range, and I couldn’t believe it. To appear
so quickly, it had to be approaching from ahead, adding velocities … and
even then, it should have been detected days before. But it wasn’t
ahead, it was angling in from the left. I computed the angle; it was
only two hundred and fifty thousand kilometers away and intersection was
a little over thirty hours. I got magnification on the screen … a rocky
spheroid, but by radar alone I couldn’t tell much more than that.”

(And Jan had said; “Please … oh, please …” and when he turned to look at
her she was standing with her hands over her ears: “Please turn off the
hooter, Case.”)

Case did not explain to the Doctor why he had smiled again. “I needed
light to make any kind of survey, but out there there was nothing, not
even starlight. I remember thinking again that anything that size would
have to have some sort of atmosphere, if only hydrogen falling in or
orbital dust, so I probed again and got a positive.”

“Your instruments—” said the Doctor.

“My instruments were wrong,” interrupted Case, “or I used them wrong, or
a lot of things happened I can’t explain. All I can do is to tell you
what happened.”

Detecting Case’s irritation, the Doctor raised small, shimmering hands.
“Please.”

“Or what I remember,” mumbled Case. “Maybe they’re not the same thing.…”

He took another pull on the sucker and swallowed and said: “I set up the
spectros for analysis and that’s one thing I won’t ever forget—the
readout for Earth Normal. It said 0.9, and then it waited and threw in
another nine, and after a bit three more: 0.99999. That’s mean
temperature and pressure as well as composition, and I doubt Terra
itself would give you a reading like that. And there’s something about
the way those nines came up that’s important, that I can’t quite get my
hand on … I don’t know.” He shifted, picked up the sucker, put it down
again. “I got some sleep then, six hours, leaving Jan on watch with
orders to wake me and take her six. We didn’t know what we were in for
and we wanted to be rested.

“When she woke me we had light. The planet, planetoid, whatever, it had
light. It looked like those old photographs of Venus, when she was first
observed, before the cloud-cover was dispersed. The radar pix were the
same as before, nearer now, but the opticals showed unbroken clouds. The
velocities were so nearly matched that I could trust the iron mike to
hang an orbit. I left a running check on the nature of that light. It
was white, more or less—a mix; it came from the clouds.

“We slid into orbit nice as you please, and dropped in close enough so
the spin was an embarrassment. I set the boat into a tail-in attitude
with the big fin leading, and a steady one-G deceleration, which made it
comfortable for us and easier on the sensors.

“You can’t expect full and sophisticated instrumentation and controls on
a lifeboat, but what we had was good and I used it to the limit. We had
all the time we needed and the velocities were so well matched that the
transition from orbital to controlled flight situations was made as
gently and pleasantly as any textbook tour-boat ever did. I lost the
red-alert feeling, canceled the six-on, six-off watches, and spent most
of my waking time on the scans. Jan said she would make a report about
the way I handled it.”

(Jan watched everything he did—well, of course, it was such a change
from those other weeks; and she jumped to do anything he asked her for;
and one day she said suddenly, “Case, you’re wonderful, you know that?
And nobody knows but me. I’ve got to tell them, somehow I’ve got to tell
them.” This disturbed him far more than any unbelievable planetoid, and
he had nodded to her and turned back to his console, glad he had
something else to fix on. After that she spent a lot of her off-watch
time murmuring into a voicewriter.)

“I set a spiral so gradual and so matched to the atmosphere densities
that frictional heating was not a problem, only useful. We braked with
it, we used the heat for hydrogen treatment; actually, I do believe we
landed with full tanks because of that, not that it did us any good.… We
reoriented, nose parallel and hung on the horizon, fin up and the living
quarters gimballed over so that for us and the boat there was up and
down again. We circled the planetoid in the high stratosphere—or what
would be a stratosphere on Terra—and mapped.

“Once into the cloud cover we found that it was just that—a cover. The
air underneath was clear, with occasional … drifting cumulus; the
weirdest thing of all, though, was that, from the underside, the cover
was illuminated only on one half. I mean, imagine a hollow sphere, half
black and half white, and call the white the illuminated part. The
planetoid is inside this sphere, and the sphere rotates around it, so
that even without a primary, the surface has day-and-night phases.

“I picked a number of likely spots and finally selected one. It was a
long, narrow, sandy plain, like a beach, at the edge of a large lake,
with forest—oh yes, there was vegetation—on the other side. It seemed
fairly level and we could land on it with a clear run to get off again.
I ran a full check on the manuals and then took over. I made fourteen,
fifteen trial approaches before I lowered the gear and went in.

“You have to understand, the lifeboat was no kind of airfoil. She came
in on what we called stilts—supporting jets—and maintained attitude with
gyros. I was practically sitting on the stilts at ten meters altitude,
and I had forward velocity down to about fifteen meters per second. A
crawl. And then there was this terrible noise and we fell over
sideways.”

(A tearing scream, edged, stabbing, and Jan’s screaming with it, and—and
his too, he screamed: to be falling, to know in that split second that
the boat was gone, that hope, born again, was gone again; and as they
toppled, that other sound, that other terrible sound that made them
scream again when terror overrode despair.…)

“It was a small lifeboat, but small is …” He spread his hands. “There
were tons of it all the same, and it fell over and I could hear the hull
plates crumpling and turning back. I think the two left-side stilts,
fore and aft, cut out, and the two right ones added to the topple and
she lay over on her side and slid and ruined herself. And when the fin
levered over and hit the sand we were thrown so hard we hit the
bulkhead, restraints and all—they pulled right out, they were never
built for such a lurch from the side as that.

“It was night, that crazy kind of night, when I came out of it. I was
lying on the sand with my head on Jan’s lap and she was wiping my face
with something cold.”

(And breathing used-up little _hics_, dry catches at the long, far end
of weeping. She’d been thrown clear, right out through a rapture in the
fin, and in time had found him dangling against the outside of the boat
by his restraints, with his blood painting down the bent plates. She had
got him down somehow and then had gone off to the beach with a bit of
foam insulation which she dipped in the water and brought back. When he
got his wits about him he gave her hell for maybe inoculating him with
God-knows-what from alien water. Her response, astonishingly, was to
fall instantly asleep.)

“I hurt all down my life side, especially, the skull and my hip, both
scraped badly and bruised. Jan was shaken up and for a while, two days
or so, I was afraid of internal injuries because she vomited a lot and
moaned in her sleep. Then I guess we both got sick for a while, a fever
and blurred vision; it is asking a lot of the biosystem to be thrust
unprotected into an alien environment, even a kindly one.”

(Kindly. Cool at night, warm in the daytime, clean air, on the high side
of oxygenation. Potable water. It could have been worse—if that had been
all there was to it. When there was more to it, it was worse.)

“It was at the end of the third day, as nearly as I can recall, that we
shook off the sickness and were able to take at good look at the
situation. We were bruised and hungry, but we were out of shock. Jan
told me she had been having dreams—a dream, I should say, vivid and
recurrent: a device like hands, sorting and shuffling cards, laying them
out, gathering them up, shuffling and laying them out again, and she was
the pack of cards. I would not mention that or even remember it if she
hadn’t described it so forcefully and so often. I had my own, too; but
then, fever, you know—” He made a wiping-away gesture.

“What were the dreams, Case?” asked the Doctor, and quickly added, “if
you don’t mind—” because Case dropped the sucker, clamped his hands
together, frowned down into them.

“I don’t mind … although it’s not very clear any more; I tried too hard
for too long not to remember, I guess.” He paused, then: “Hard to grasp,
and any words I use are like approximations, but … I seemed to be
suspended from some kind of filament. One end was inside me, somehow,
and the other was high up, in, shadows. Circling around me were eyes.
Not pairs of eyes or one pair, but I forget the arrangement. And I
realized that the eyes weren’t circling me, but whatever held the
filament up there was twirling it while the eyes watched, and then there
was—”

“Yes?” The prompting was very gentle.

“Laughing,” said Case, and he whispered, “Laughing.” He looked up at the
Doctor. “Did I tell you about that noise just before we crashed?”

“You mentioned a noise.”

“Partly it was the gyro bearings,” said Case. “I found that out later,
after the hull broke up and I had a chance to look at the drive sector.
You had to see that to believe it. The only way I can describe it is to
ask you to imagine all the bearing assemblies—every one of them, mind
you—while turning at max, instantaneously turned solid, welded into one
piece. The shafts had wrung big ragged holes in the mounts, and it was
these spinning down, tearing everything apart down there, that made most
of the screaming. The rest was Jan, well, and me too, and—”

The Doctor waited.

“—laughing,” Case said at length, and, “I don’t think it was a real
sound. Jan said she heard it too, but it wasn’t a real sound.… Words are
no good, sometimes. Whatever we heard; it wasn’t with our ears.” He
closed his eyes and shook briefly. The laughter. That laughter.

Not Case’s laughter; Case was not a laughing man.

“We were hungry. I boosted her back into the cabin—the rupture was too
high off the ground for me to get in by myself, and she rummaged around
looking for something to eat. She drew a blank. Lifeboats are designed
for survival in space, not for planetfall. Suckers and their contents
are—were—constituted from raw elements which were useless to us without
processing, and we had no power to process. There was a lot of shouting
back and forth while I tried to find a way for her to override the
fail-safes that had shut down the power when the boat careened, but
nothing worked. She threw down whatever she thought would be useful—seat
cushions and a big soft sheet of head-lining and some rod stock and
other junk, and the first-aid case, which we didn’t appreciate much
until later, but as I said, we were _hungry_. I don’t think either one
of us had ever known that feeling before and we just didn’t like it.

“Jan had read that fruits could be eaten without preparation and told me
about it, so we left the ship and went across the sand to the vegetated
zone. The sand felt strange to my feet, not unpleasant, but painful as
we moved into the soil and rock and undergrowth. The little branches
lashed at our bodies; some of them had sharp points on them that
scratched. We found one great bank of plants heavy with little round red
fruits that Jan said were berries. She ate some and we waited for a
time, but there were no ill effects so she got some for me. We also
found what seemed to be large fruits, but on breaking them open,
discovered that they were full of small crescent-shaped constructs with
casings so hard we couldn’t break them. We brought a few of these back
with us and cracked them against the hull plates with a stone. They were
very good, very nourishing. We slept.”

(They slept on the sand and were cold, until Jan got the piece of soft
head-lining and covered them. The heat of their bodies was trapped by it
and kept them warm. It was a new experience for both, both having lived
their lives virtually without clothes, in controlled environments, and
sleeping weightless with a gentle restraint or supported by pressor
fields.)

“The next day we went the other way to find food, to the lake. Jan went
out into the water and washed her whole body in it, and called me. Since
we no longer had the tingler I joined her. It was not the same, but not
completely unpleasant either, and we did feel a lot better afterward. Up
the beach a little way were rocks thrusting out of the water, and on
them grew great clusters of bony things that Jan called bivalves. They
weren’t easy to get off the rocks, and once touched they closed up
tight; but we developed a skill with a bit of stone and a quiet
approach, and managed to harvest a number of them. To swallow one at
first was nauseating, but it was what you might call an acquired taste,
and soon we were eating enthusiastically. It was while we were up there
that the boat began to break up.”

Case looked up at the Doctor, standing patiently before him, but as
usual his glance told him nothing. “It made a terrible noise, the plates
shearing like that, and as we ran down the beach we could see it
settling. It was just as if it lay in soft mud, but it didn’t; the sand
under it was as solid as what we ran on, and dry. All the same, it was
sinking, and breaking up. I’m telling you what I saw, what I remember,”
he said defensively. The Doctor inclined his head and made a wordless
motion for Case to continue. “I can’t help it,” Case grumbled. “It’s
what happened.” When the blue man still did not respond, he went on:

“The nose and tail were crushed and sunk into the sand, and there were
three new breaks in the hull. That’s when I saw the gyro bearings I told
you about. The boat looked as if a giant had taken it by the two ends
and bent it over his knee. The fin was flat on the ground now, and I
looked in through the broken plates, and then while Jan screamed at me
not to, I scrambled inside. It was a mess, the way she’d said it was,
and worse. Nothing answered on the console except the Abandon matrix and
indicator lights showing that four, of the six lifeboats were ready for
launch and the other two inoperative. I touched one of them and a ’belt
launched from the wreck, shot across the beach and crashed at the edge
of the forest where it exploded and set fire to the trees and drove Jan
half into hysteria. I tried to shut down the matrix but the controls
failed to respond, so I backed out—into Jan, who was afraid something
had happened to me. I ordered her out. I suppose I was fairly forceful,
it stopped the hysteria … and got out myself and ran around the hull.
All of the launch ports had opened—two were all but underground. I
crawled into the third one, where the coffin had just launched, and it
was still hot, and Jan began screaming at me again, and I didn’t care, I
went for the leads from the control center and ripped them off, and then
crawled back to the launch booster and began to pull and pry at the
release toggles. They came up and the coffin slid out on its rails and
fell to the sand. I got into the space where it had been and was able to
reach the control leads of Number Three. I had no trouble with the
releases on that one but it would not slide all the way out; it just
nosed into the sand. Because of that I couldn’t get to Four. Five and
Six were the ones the board had said were inoperative, and it didn’t
make any difference anyhow; they were underground.

“The hull plates overhead somewhere made a tremendous crackle; I can’t
tell you what it was like inside there; it was as if the noise was
inside my head. The whole structure settled, and I can’t tell you how I
got out—I found myself on the sand outside Number Three just in time to
see Jan trying to crawl into Number One, screaming again. I grabbed her
around the hips and snatched her out (she screamed louder than ever
until she realized what had grabbed her; she thought I was still inside
and was going in to pull me out. That Jan, she was—she—)

“Well …

“Number Two coffin was free and clear; Three was still half in and half
out, and I realized that if the boat settled much more it would carry
the coffin with it. I got hold of it, lifting and pulling. Jan
immediately saw what was needed and helped me, and we got the coffin
free. We fell back on the sand gasping and sobbing for breath, just used
up—or so we thought until the lifeboat seemed to … well, bulge is the
word, spread, as if a big hand spread out on top and pushed downward.
The whole thing started to crack and crackle and something came loose
and whistled through the air between us, and if you think we were
terminally bushed—we did—we got terminally panicked. We must’ve
scampered a hundred meters away with that noise behind us, pressure
tanks banging and hissing and roaring, twisting metal crackling and
screeching, and—and—”

The blue man waited. “And laughing,” Case whispered. He drew a deep
breath and continued.

“When it was over … we thought it would never be over, we lay in a swag
in the sand and watched our boat chewing itself up and the ground
swallowing, it seemed to go on for hours … when it was over there was
nothing but some tumbled sand, a great cloud of dust, and the two
coffins and the junk we had thrown out earlier, lying there, some of it
half-buried in sand and dust. We looked at each other and we were in
almost as bad shape as the boat, only we weren’t buried yet. My hands
were burned and one fingernail was torn half off, and the scrapes I got
in the crash were all open and bleeding, and Jan was bruised and had a
cut on her head and we were both covered with mudsweat and blood.

“We helped each other down to the lake and washed. We were too hurt and
tired to think; maybe that’s what shock really is, because if we could
have thought it all out then I think we would’ve just lain down and
died. We didn’t know where we were, we didn’t know what had happened or
what was happening or what would (except that whatever it might be, it
didn’t have much hope in it for us.)”

Case sighed and placed his hands on the broad arms of his chair. Before
he could rise, the blue man swiftly and considerately touched (in that
untouching way of his) something on his panel, and decking appeared in
the chamber. Either it was made or it was there all the time and only
now became opaque. Case didn’t know, but it was something to stand on
and “Uh!” His knees sagged and he caught at the chair arm. “It’s all
right,” he told the watchful Doctor. He pressed himself upright; stood,
walked a pace, turned and stood by the chair, feeling the newness of
movement, its old, somatically forgotten familiarity. “This is one G?”

“Not quite,” said the Doctor.

“Try it.”

The blue man ran a hand partway around the edge of a disk, which
increased its glow. The transition from one gravitic state to another is
a strange thing indeed, for everything responds. The brain pressures the
skull as the feet press the floor; skin high on the chest stretches, low
on the belly becomes less taut; the cheeks, the hair, the masses of
liver and gut proclaim themselves. When Case began to tremble he sat
down again. “I guess it’ll be a while.” he said shakily.

“It will.”

“But I’ll make it.”

“I’d say so. You seem to have a special talent for that.”

Case said thoughtfully, “Maybe I do. But then, I had Jan.”

(“I had Jan.” Strong Jan, wise Jan, tender Jan.) Jan kept herself to
herself, mostly, and took orders—not because she was a woman, because
the Space Services in general and Xn in particular made no distinctions;
actually there were more female officers than men; Jan took orders
because she was a rating and he was an officer … to begin with … and
after that her reasons were her own. Perhaps she was one of those who
would always defer to a decision-maker, which Case was, through and
through. And perhaps she had other reasons. She knew her specialty and
all its peripherals. A good biologist (and she was good or she wouldn’t
have been with Xn) is a physicist and a chemist, a physiologist and a
cytologist, a geneticist and a zoologist. Her way was to remain alert to
whatever Case was doing; to make herself available in every possible
way, and to keep her id, ego, self, whatever that inner
“who-I-really-am” thing is—to herself. It was Jan who reasoned that some
of the food they gathered might serve them better, and cause less
diarrhea and stomachache, if it were processed, and that an application
of heat might suffice in lieu of something more sophisticated. It was
she who took fire from the burning forest and preserved it, and
experimented with the bivalves and fruits and later the fish they were
able to catch (it was she who reinvented the gorge: the fish-hook
concept escaped her). Case and Jan came from generations of people who
lived in a world without primitives, in which the art and practice of
living off the land were academicians’ mysteries.

It took them forty-three days to discover a solid-seeming outcropping
with the right slant, to get the coffins—lifebelts—up to it and bedded
there, ready for use. They got them across the sand and into the water,
lever and haul, roll, lift and tug, and floated them up to the closest
possible point to the rocks, where they did the hardest work—manhandling
them upslope to their appointed cradles and setting them in. They lay
close to one another, almost exactly parallel and angled to the sky, and
it was after exhaustive checks and rechecks of everything that Case
bound the launching systems of both to the controls of one. Their drill
took into account a number of possibilities: if there were one survivor,
he or she would take Number Three, which contained the master firing
key. If one were incapacitated, the other would load him or her into the
“slave” and board the “master.” If both were ambulant, Case would take
the “master,” Three. Case gave the two tiny craft meticulous checks on a
regular schedule, and (sometimes by a huge effort of will) they touched
not one crumb, not one drop, from the stores aboard the tiny craft.

They permitted themselves no fixed idea as to why they prepared this
rather hopeless escape. The coupled launching, of course, would give
them a fair chance of staying together in the gulfs of space. What would
make them launch would be to get away from something or to get to
something; and it was always possible that they would never launch at
all: but “Better to have ’em and not need ’em,” Case said; “than to need
’em and not have ’em.”

They made memories … which, after all, is the only meaningful thing any
conscious entity can do. Many were not to be shared.

Under the blanket she had improvised from some headlining: “Case, what
are you doing?”

“Self-relief. Acceptable alternative to the tingler, according to the
manual.”

“Oh. ‘Furtherance of psycho-physiological equilibrium’ under Health,
individual, under conditions, emergency.”

“Right. Section—”

“I recall the reference,” she said: one of the few times she had ever
interrupted him. “This isn’t an emergency, Case.”

He put his nose out into the chill night air and looked up at the black
starless sky. “It isn’t?”

“Not that kind of an emergency.”

“We’ve lost our tingler.”

“So we have.”

“Oh, I see. You are prepared to take care of this for me.” She said,
“Well prepared.”

“I had thought of that,” Case said seriously. “However, it has been a
principle with me not to extend my authority into the personal area.
That is a presumption.”

“It isn’t a presumption,” she said flatly. “Women, too, need means for
the furtherance of psycho-physiological equilibrium.”

“They do?” It wasn’t a denial; he had simply never thought about it. Now
that he did, he realized with a flash that it must be so. “How very
efficient.”

“Isn’t it.” Then she enveloped him wildly. He was shaken. He knew why
she cried out (he was not completely ignorant) but not why she cried. It
was as good as any tingler, and he could see that in time it might even
be better.

And they built a shelter. The first time it rained at night was, in its
way, the worst thing that had happened to them. The crash, their
injuries, cut feet, thorn-gouged bodies, even hunger—none of these
contained the special misery of being wet and cold in the dark with
nowhere to go until the sun came up. They clung together under the
permeable head-liner wet as worms, and the moment it grew light they
began to build. They found a rock out-crop near the edge of the beach,
with two large, many-branched trees near it, and by laying poles from
the top of the rock to the tree-crotches, they had roof-beams. The poles
were a special treasure; they found them in the burned part of the
forest where trees had fallen.

Nowhere else on the planet did they see fallen trees.

They found vines to lace between and over the poles and down the sides,
where the ends could be staked into the ground, and another kind of
vine, thick and tough, to weave through these horizontally, to carry the
thatch of the roof and sidewalls. Thatch (which, like the gorge, was
Jan’s invention) was practical because of the sheltered location, and
because there were no insects. The now-ragged piece of headliner served
for end wall and door, and—

—and they were happy there.

No literature has truly defined “happy”; its special quality is that its
nature is seldom grasped at the time it happens, but only afterward.

Case had a long, long afterward.

“We quarreled once,” Case said after a time. “I think that’s where it
began, the—the nightmare.

“Her voicewriter. I’d been up the beach at the fish-trap. There was an
inlet there and we’d set stones in the form of a V with the point
shoreward and just a little opening at the point. Fish would swim in
through the opening and once inside they couldn’t find the hole. After a
time it was full of fish. The big ones ate the little ones and that kept
them going without any help from us. Most of the time you could stand on
dry ground and spear one, first time out. I came back with a fine one, a
meaty fish with a triangular head and no scales, and you know, when you
expect someone to be glad and they …”

(She flew at him; he had to drop the fish and take her upper arms and
hold her and even shake her a little before he could understand what she
was screaming at him.)

“It was the voicewriter. It was one of the few things she had been able
to save from the cabin of the lifeboat, and she used it every day. It
was a private thing with her, and I sensed this and never questioned it
and never played it back. I assumed she was keeping a log, and let it go
at that. And it was gone, and never before or afterward did I see her so
angry.

“It took hours for me to convince her that I had not taken it, that she
must have mislaid it somewhere. She was faced with an impossibility; I
would not lie to her, or at least, I never had; and she was sure she had
not lost the writer. She receded finally into a mood of doubt which
lasted until … until … for the rest of the time.

“And a while later I had a chance to understand a little better how she
felt. I had an array of stone tools—spearpoints and cutting blades and
fish-scrapers—that had cost me I don’t know how many hours of effort and
care, and we had come to depend on them. There was a shelf in the rock
which formed the back wall of our house, and I had them neatly laid out
by size and function; I worked on them every minute I wasn’t doing
something else. Perhaps you can imagine my feelings when I returned to
the house to get a cutting tool and found them gone—all of them. Jan was
gathering fruits in the forest and when she came back I was waiting for
her—furious. I suppose what happened between us would have been amusing
to an outsider, how I yelled, how she denied, how I doubted someone who
had never lied before … what stopped us from the angry accusations
was … was that someone—something—did think it was funny. We heard
laughter.

“That stopped the fight—right then. For a moment we held on to each
other, not breathing, listening. I thought at first it was coming from
inside my head, so sourceless was it. But then I knew Jan heard it
too—not loud, pervading everything.

“That same night we awoke to something else—a smell. Doctor, no chemical
laboratory in history has ever produced a more powerful, disgusting
smell than that. It was the essence of rot and filth and sickness; it
brought us up standing, gasping for breath. We ran outside, and then
across the beach and into the water. The smell was everywhere. Jan
vomited.

“And then it was gone, in less than an hour—just gone, without a trace.
Jan said she heard the laughter again.

“The next day we took some fruit—we had no way of carrying water—in a
basket Jan had woven, and went inland, to climb a high point we could
use to scan the territory. We had explored it before, and it gave a wide
view. If there was anything or anyone new on the planetoid with us, we
wanted to know what it was.

“It was a long, hard climb—it would have been impossible for us the year
before, but our feet were tough and our skins well used to heat and wind
and thorns; if it had not been for the growing fear, it would have been
a pleasant adventure.

“All the effort got us, besides the exhaustion, was another session with
the smell, and more laughter.

“It got cold. For two days and a night the lake and the little water we
had was frozen solid. Our only covering was the headliner, and we rolled
up in that and lay shivering. At the twentieth hour we had to get up to
relieve our bladders—did you know you can be dying of thirst and still
have to relieve your bladder?—and though we were gone for only a minute
or so, and moved only a few meters from the shelter, when we got back
the liner was gone.

“We almost died. We would have died, I think, but just before dark it
got warm again. Melted frost was dripping all around us; we drank it and
had something to eat. We slept like dead people.

“In the morning the lake was gone—a lake so big, that part of it, you
couldn’t see the other side. I looked at Jan and I’ll never forget the
way she stared at it, eyes wide open and kind of … dry, and she didn’t
start and she didn’t cry out; she just said in a very low voice, ‘Case,
I can’t stand any more.’ Jan could stand anything, that’s what I
thought.

She told me some things. She said that the forest was impossible—no
humus, no windfalls. She said that fruit trees just don’t bear all the
time without blooming and growing the fruit in cycles, without some
means of pollinating … a whole lot of technical staff. She said the same
thing about the bivalves and the fish; there seemed to be no aquatic
vegetation, no plankton or equivalent—no reason for the fish to have
evolved. I remember the smell came up as she was talking, as she was
saying, ‘Something here wanted us, made this place for us. Now it
doesn’t want us any more.’

“I said, ‘Would we be better off in space, in the coffins?’ She said
yes. I said, ‘We wouldn’t be together.’ She looked at me for a long
time. She had eyes you couldn’t see into. I couldn’t see anything. She
said, ‘We’ll leave together and we’ll be picked up together or we’ll
die. At least this ends through our choice, and not at the command of
some—some awful—’ and the smell peaked up and she vomited.

“I said all right, we’ll go.

“We went down to the beach, only now it was a sandy shelf at the edge of
huge rocky barrens where the lake had been. We heard the laughing again,
loud. We struck up the beach toward the coffins. There was a terrible
rumbling behind us and the beach fell away into a rocky pit fifty to a
hundred meters deep, the sand blowing about like snow. We began to run,
and another section of beach fell.

“That really terrified Jan and I had to sprint all out to catch up with
her. I grabbed her and held her until she stopped struggling. More beach
fell, some of it not a meter from our feet, but I wouldn’t budge. She
finally quieted.

“I said, ‘I think you’re right. If whatever-it-is wants us to go, we’ll
go. If it wants us to go, it will leave the lifeboats alone until we get
there. If it wanted to kill us we’d be dead by now.’

“She said, ‘All right, then, but _hurry!_’ and I said, ‘No, Jan—I’ll go,
but I won’t run.’

“She looked at me—really looked at me, not as some force holding her
while she struggled to run, not glancing over my shoulder at the edges
of that new hole in the ground—really at me, and she smiled. Smiled. She
said, ‘All right, Case,’ and took my hand.

“Suddenly the air was sweet and the ground no longer shook, and we
walked up the beach looking at each other and not at the place where the
lake used to be, or back where our house was, or anything. When we got
to the little launch-pad I had built, I started a careful preflight
check. I checked everything, Doctor—everything. I took my time and Jan
gave me readouts, one craft to the other, when I asked for them. All
that while the whole planetoid was still, like waiting, like watching.
And whatever it was, it was no longer laughing.

“Jan got in and lay down. She put out her arms and kissed me in a way—”

(—in a way she never had before, not even lying together. She … never
had kissed him before, not really, only sometimes when in the midst of
her own storm she seemed to forget some subtle resolution of her own.…)

“… in a way that was all the words anyone needed, and then I closed the
plate, and saw the dogs turn tight from the inside. Then I got into my
own craft and buttoned up and punched the Go button.”

Case meant to say, “And she didn’t launch,” but his voice wouldn’t work
and he whispered, “And she didn’t launch. She didn’t launch.” He meant
to look up at the Doctor but his eyes didn’t seem to work either. He
dashed a hand angrily across them. “You see,” he said harshly, “I—”

“I see,” said the blue man gently. Something seemed to have rushed out
of Case; he was slumped in his chair and his hands flattened out on the
arms as if they had weight on them. The Doctor turned to see the
telltales and said, “I think you need to sleep for a while, Case.”

Case moved his head slightly but did not answer otherwise. The blue man
waved at a disk on his board and the chair became a couch, the lights
dimmed, the Doctor faded away.

Case’s resuscitation had not ceased with the withdrawal of the tubes
from his arms. Asleep and awake, he had been bathed in emanations and
vibrations, tiny search beams and organic detectors. The bland mixture
in the sucker was computer-formularized just for him, here, now, in this
up-to-the-second condition; so that when he next awoke it was in his
usual style, alertly and all together. He rose and stretched, taking
pleasure in the knotting and flexing of his muscles. He tried a step,
then another, then turned to face the bank of telltales. Clear and open
and fully, he could read them all—even the many which did not exist even
in theory when he was born. He smiled when he saw that the gravity was
1.2 Earth normal. In space, a third of that was usual, but Case smiled
and left it where it was. He looked over the huge bank of controls, and
found them completely understandable, while marveling at their
completeness.

He walked back to the oval doorway through which his coffin had been
transported, and went down the corridor. He could read the
never-before-seen legends on the doors: ARMAMENT, DRIVE, ELEMENT BANK,
BIOLOGY, CHEMISTRY (he knew without looking that these were
interconnected), GENERAL REPAIR AND TOOLS … on and on to the end of the
corridor and around two comers and forward again on the other side of
the ship: ATMOSPHERE AND PRESSURE, COMMUNICATIONS, COMPUTER RECREATION
AND EXERCISE, on and on again, until at last he faced the door marked
MASTER CONTROL. It dilated for him with a snap as he approached it, and
he entered.

The control room was sizable, and again he found himself perfectly
familiar with equipment he had never seen before. By the main control
bank and its three chairs stood the blue man. There had been no one else
anywhere on board, “And you’re a hologram,” said Case, completing his
thought aloud.

The blue man inclined his head. “There has not been a man aboard this
ship in over seven hundred years. It’s too far away, and anyway … nobody
cares. Correction. A great many people care, are interested, even
fascinated. But the urge to come out, to be personally involved—it seems
to have left us. You know what Earth is like now.”

It was not a question. Case called upon the knowledge which had been fed
into his brain in just the way you can call upon the likeness of your
first teacher’s face, your first fist-fight, the time she … or he came
to you and said … You see? These things are with you always, but are not
evident until you call.

So Case looked on Earth as a contemporary, ten centuries past his death,
and wagged his head slowly. “It shouldn’t have come to this.”

“It had to. It was that or die,” said the blue man; and Case thought a
bit and saw that it was so.

“You can go back, Case. You can be suspended rather more efficiently
than you were before, and for a good while longer. It would
take—oh—another fifteen hundred years to get you there, and it is not
possible to predict what Earth would be like when you got there. Still,
it would be Earth—it would be … home.”

“ ‘You can’t go home again,’ ” Case quoted from somewhere, with not a
little bitterness. “I suppose there’s an alternative.”

“There is, and it is a matter of your free choice. You see, Case,
primitive as you may seem to some of us, you have a quality which we
lack and admire—a willingness to go out, to do, to explore and discover
and find, actually and physically, and not in theory or extrapolation or
imagination. This ship was designed, yes, and used, by men like you, and
when the last of them died on an exploration, there were no
replacements, and besides, the ship was already so far away that only
long-suspended men could reach it.

“The ship itself is self-supporting, and not only has a superb computer
system, but is tied to all the computers of the Terran Group. We have
what might be called a standing-wave situation, constantly locked on to
this ship. Through it we can transmit nothing but information—but we can
give you any amount of that. From it, we will have an opportunity to
experience with you the places you go, the things you see and learn and
experience.”

“You are giving me this ship? To take where?”

The blue, shimmering figure spread its arms. “Anywhere.”

“But you watch everything I do.”

“If you’re willing.”

“I’m not willing. I need some sort of privacy—including inside of my
head.”

“That is a sacred matter with us. We will not intrude, and if you like
we will give you a zone of privacy anywhere you like in the ship.”

“How about this: instead of any special place, we make it anywhere I
am—any time I say so?”

“You would not deny us the—”

“No, no, no,” Case said impatiently; “I am conditioned to keep a bargain
once it’s struck. You’re giving me this ship and a free hand, and you
want something in exchange. I’ll see that you get it, and I won’t
short-change you.”

“Very well,” said the blue man. “You have already been thoroughly
briefed on the ship’s operation and on those things which are of
particular interest to the public at large and to specialists. You have
at your command the memory banks of this computer and all others tied to
it. Case Hardin—the ship is yours.”

This seemed devastatingly abrupt, but there seemed nothing else to say
except “Thanks,” which he did.

“If this means of communication suits you,” said the blue man, “call me,
and I’ll manifest this way immediately. There are quite a few other
means; ask the computer. Good luck, and thank you.” And he faded, and
was gone.

Case stood looking for a long time at the place where the blue man had
been, shook his head, grinned briefly, and went to the central command
chair.

He sat down. “Computer,” he said, “your name’s Buzzbox.”

“Yes, Commander.”

“Case.”

“Yes, Case.”

“Now, here’s what I want you to do.…”

Case came in low over the beach, low and slowly. His ship was in orbit
and he flew a small and highly sophisticated boat; capable beyond
anything a man of his time could have dreamt of. In the small pocket
adhering to his chest (like a graft; only he could will it loose) was a
compact device which would command both vessels and all communications.
His computer had made short work of locating this sector of space,
working with the trajectory he followed when he was picked up, and
feeding in an immense amount of observation on anything and everything
which might have diverted the coffin during those dead years.

“You haven’t changed things much,” he muttered, to the planetoid or to
whatever lived there. The beach had a lake again; the sand was scuffled
in familiar places, and a patch was worn to the edge of the woods where
their house had been.

Was. Right now.

He drifted to it and dropped the ramp. Yes, the thatched house with the
ragged piece of head-lining fluttering in the light breeze, and inside
the familiar dried clay plates and even the withered remnants of fruit
she had … own hands … looking up at … Jan … Jan. And his spearpoints and
scrapers, oh and her voicewriter.

He took them.

Back in his boat, heart almost stopped, breath held, he tooled up to the
spot where the coffins had been. Gone. Both gone.

He landed again and walked slowly up to the rocks. Here she had stood,
calling out readings as he checked, with the sweet air full of dust from
the fallen lakeshore. Here he had bent over the open coffin and she had
kissed him, kissed him in a way that …

There were the burn marks: his launch. Where hers had been—no marks at
all. If she hadn’t launched, yet was not here …

_Oh but it’s a thousand years, man!_

He thought he heard a sound (laughter) and from the corner of his eye
some sort of movement, high up, distant.

Only a bird.

Bird! The one thing they never saw on this planetoid—a bird.

He turned to watch it. It was fifty meters high over the forest, coming
straight for him in a flat glide. He waited grimly for it. He looked
like a naked man with something attached to his chest. He was a great
deal more than that.

The bird was not a bird, but a clownlike creature with wide, intelligent
eyes that seemed to be either biped or quadruped. Its wings were
batlike, but rolled and folded until they were quite presentable arms.
It landed and waddled fearlessly up to Case and stared at him.

Case stared back, and did not move until the thing—_laughed_.

It was, full and true, the laughter that had haunted them, driven them,
when they dwelt here, and Case’s new status and powers could not protect
him from the wave of terror and fury that swept through him. He found
himself by his boat at a bound, backing up the ramp, slit-eyed, gasping.
He would blast this thing into a powder. He’d crack this whole evil
planet like an egg. He’d—

The laughing thing waddled up to him on three legs, holding something
dangling from its finger-claws on the fourth.

Jan’s brassard?

He took it gingerly and spread it out. Jan’s brassard. He made an animal
cry and leaped for the clown-creature, but it skipped back out of the
way. It stood there grinning at him, and, in a most humanlike way,
waving him on.

Slowly he followed it.

It led him inland, making no particular effort to stay out of his
reach—knowing, he realized, that he would not harm it as long as it
might lead him to Jan’s body. He wondered if it knew the boat was
protecting him, could drop a shield over him in a twentieth of a second,
scorch the ground around him for thirty meters, could flash to his side
in a blink (for its drive was inertia-less), could even follow and find
an escaping attacker, earth, sea, or sky.

But he played it the clown’s way, toiling through the sand and rocks and
into the forest, where in a small clearing, the clown-creature,
grinning, began to dig.

Case watched it until it stopped and looked up, grinning its stupid grin
(under those bright eyes), and motioned for him to help.

And he did, with his bare hands, shoulder to shoulder with this
improbable creature, until curved white metal showed in the earth.

And then he dug! There was, somehow, a glory in the pain of broken nails
and aching muscles and rasping, labored breathing. Slowly the length of
the coffin saw the light, and they freed it. Side by side they got
fingers under one end, and heaved. Case didn’t care what he put into it;
the strength of the clown-creature was astonishing. Up it came, with
Case dusting earth from its flanks and crying, crying like a child.

He fingered the control and his boat lanced in through the trees and
settled to the forest floor. The ramp dropped and two small winchers,
like drifting saucers, appeared and flew to the end of the coffin. The
clown-thing made as if to help manhandle the coffin up the ramp, but
Case waved it back. The winch-plates lifted the coffin, turned it, and
carried it through the air, up the ramp and into the boat.

Case leaped up the ramp and turned at the top. “Thanks a heap hell of a
lot, friend, whoever you are, and good-bye.”

The clown-creature also leaped up the ramp and looked pleadingly at
Case, its head on one side.

“Look, I’m grateful and all that, but I’ve got to go. And to tell you
the truth, I want no part of this place or anything that belongs to it.
Now beat it.” He made a go-away gesture, but the thing just stood there
pleading, so he gave it a push and it toppled off the ramp, half
unfolding its strange wings to keep its balance.

Case went inside as the ramp raised. The clown-thing laughed once,
dwindled to a black shiny button, and bounced up the moving ramp and
into the boat just before the ramp closed.

Case settled at the controls. Behind him was the curved cabin bench,
padded in glossy black material which was held in place by a series of
shiny black buttons. Unseen by Case, a shiny black button bounced up on
the bench, up on the backrest, and became a button exactly in line with
all the others.

After watching the Doctor for an interminable time, Case left him to his
work and went to his quarters, wondering if he should have himself
knocked out for a dozen hours, knowing he could not, not until he
knew … The Doctor had said only, “It’s been a terrible time, a terrible
long time …” and had not wanted Case to look at her. He had said a
strange thing: “_She_ wouldn’t want you to look at her,” and Case had
said why not, and the Doctor had said, “Because she’s a woman.”

Everybody seemed to know something about women that Case did not.

He thumped down in his quarters and looked around him. Jan … try not to
think of Jan, with the Jan-ness of her permeating the ship. Try not to
think of her, with the spearpoints and the voicewriter lying there on
the …

He picked up the voicewriter, _“Shining in the light …”_ Her voice, a
half-whisper. He set it back a bit, and played: _“… if only he could be
outside of himself, see himself shining in the light with the water
splashing into pearls and his teeth shining too as he laughs … why can’t
he ever laugh with me? What makes him so grave and careful? How could he
know so little about a woman?”_

Some of it was scientific data and observation, but again that hushed,
hungry voice, _“I’ll never give in, never, never, I’ll never let him
know; but why can’t he see it, why can’t he say it just once?”_

Say what? thought Case.

He kept on listening to the voicewriter until he found out.

“Case.”

“Yea, Buzzbox.”

“He beat me, and I love him.”

“What are you talking about?”

“The Dreamer. He loves me too. Hey thanks, Case.”

“Repeat, from your call.”

“Case.”

“Yeah, Buzzbox.”

“He beat me, and I love him.”

“Hold it right there. Who beat you?”

“The Dreamer. At chess.”

“Somebody beat _you_ at chess?”

“Twenty-three moves. A queen’s bishop’s pawn opening, and then—”

“Never mind the blow-by-blow, Buzzbox. Where is this who-did-you-say?”

“Dreamer. In my house.”

Case slammed out of his quarters and down to the door marked “computer.”
There before the twinkling wall which was the heart of Buzzbox sat a
small table. On the table was a chessboard. On the chessboard was the
sparse remnant of a very bloody chess game, with the black king turned
down in defeat. Before the table was a stool, and on the stool squatted
the clown-creature, looking up at him with its brilliant eyes, and
laughing.

_“How the hell did you get there?”_

“You brought him up in the boat. I guess I love you too, Case,” said
Buzzbox.

“If I did I wasn’t aware of it.”

“I know you weren’t, but you brought him anyway, And he loves me. And
he’s going to stay with us.”

The clown-thing nodded vigorously.

“The hell he is. He goes right back to that crazy planetoid.”

“He can’t go back to it,” said Buzzbox. “He _is_ the planetoid. He lives
next to another space. You don’t understand that. Well, I do, he
explained it to me. He can be anything he wants. He can be big as a pin
or a molecule or a whole planet. He can squirt any part of himself from
one space to another, like a half-filled balloon through a hole in a
board. And he dreams things up; that’s why I call him the Dreamer.”

The Dreamer laughed and suddenly was a cut-crystal vase, and was a pale
lavender centipede, and was a clown-creature again, laughing.

“He gets off this ship.”

“Then so do I. Case, he _loves_ me, can’t you understand that?”

The clown-creature nodded vigorously. Case glared at it. “What the hell
do you know about love, Buzzbox?”

“The Dreamer explained it to me. He learned it from a voicewriter. This
girl was loving _you_. What the hell do you know about love, Case?”

Case felt a moment of disorientation, utter disbelief. Computers do not
take this tone with the master. “What’s gotten into you, Buzzbox?”

“I’m in love, I’m in love, and he loves me!”

And that’s what love does, thought Case. Frees the slaves. Damns the
consequences.

“And what happens if I kick this—this batwinged ape off my ship?”

“Then you’re on your own, Master. You’ll never get another buzz from
me.”

“Do you know what this goggle-eyed monstrosity has put me through?”

“He saved you.”

Case glowered at the Dreamer, who smiled back at him cheerfully. And
then he thought about the lifeboat, and the strange planet that swam up
out of nowhere, and the way those nines appeared on his Terra Normal
readout—not instantaneously, as it would in any normal demand, but bit
by bit, as the planetoid … the Dreamer … sensed what was needed and
supplied it. And their year there, while the Dreamer watched … (How
lonely must a creature like that be?) … and learned. Then—the
voicewriter; something new; the day-by-day account of a proud woman’s
falling in love and loving … loving a grim, serious,
unleavened … innocent … idiot like him. What the hell do you know about
love, Case?… _“Why can’t he say it? Why can’t he say it just once?” …_
and the cold, the disappearing lake … that was to drive him away—him,
not them.

“Why did he drive me away, and keep her?”

“He thought she might love him,” said the Buzzbox.

_“Him!”_ Case gaped at the ludicrous little clown, who nodded,
shimmered, and stood before him as a muscular blond Adonis; shimmered
and appeared as a stately bearded monarch in a jewel-encrusted robe;
shimmered and appeared as the ludicrous winged ape.

“She didn’t want to love anybody but you, Case. But he had to find out.”

“If it killed me,” said Case.

“It didn’t, did it,” said the computer reasonably.

“And if I let this … this silly-looking nightmare ship with me, how do I
know he won’t pull another caper like that?”

“Because he loves me, and I can’t hurt you.”

It occurred to Case that the computer and the alien were being very kind
to him in being persuasive—when he really had no choice. The powers
possessed by the computer alone were awesome. Combine them with those of
a tachyonic, trans-spatial entity like this, and the mind began to bend.
“Well,” he said, “we’ll see.…”

He went forward to the hospital. The blue man made no effort to stop him
as he hesitated on the threshold, so he went in. Together they looked at
the naked sleeping woman afloat in the glow of the beams. She was
full-fleshed again and her scars were gone. Her hair was loose. He had
never seen anything more beautiful in his life. “She—”

“She will wake in a moment,” said the Doctor. “Perhaps you’d better
speak to her when she does.”

When she opened her eyes, it was Case she saw first. “Case …”

He spoke to her. He knew what to say, now.

Somewhere he heard laughter. He didn’t mind any more.



AGNES, ACCENT AND ACCESS


In the summer of 1978 a wind blew slantwise through the offices of M&H.
The phrase was Mr. Miroshi’s for he had a touch of poetry about him.
What he meant by it was the mildly bizarre, perplexing, and completely
unpredictable behavior of the information retrieval sequences. In the
course of an ordinary business day one might hardly think it crucial if
the computer delivered to the Math section, for example, a medical paper
complete with unsettling illustrations, or if Marketing, wanting a
survey of New Zealand imports, received instead a treatise on human
hostility and aggression. But M&H was no ordinary business, so they
called in Merrihew.

Merrihew was no ordinary trouble-shooter, either.

Mr. Handel, co-president of M&H, explained to Merrihew about M&H, once
they were settled in their booth in a cafe not far from the M&H
headquarters. (Merrihew’s suggestion, of course; he was not given to
charging into situations he did not comprehend.)

“No ordinary business, Mr. Merrihew. We are not a large firm, really.
But then Maserati isn’t a large firm either, and no one yet produces
Yomeimon Gates on a production line. Our methods are, I would say,
unusual. I would not,” he added modestly, “say unique.”

“Your advertising says that for you.”

“Ah, then you do know something about us.”

Merrihew, whose reputation was that of knowing something about
everything, gestured for Mr. Handel to continue. He did: “We are highly
diversified and we buy, sell, trade, manufacture, contract, subcontract,
and produce a great many things in many different ways and places. It is
safe to say that each of our activities is successful to a
degree—varying, of course—”

“From excellent all the way down to good.”

“You are kind, Mr. Merrihew.”

“You are successful, that’s all.”

“Ah.” Mr. Handel was pleased. “You do make it difficult to be modest.”

“It is only difficult to be modest when it’s painful, Mr. Handel, and
it’s only painful when it’s necessary. Please go on.”

Mr. Handel raised his eyebrows at this piece of pragmatic philosophy and
went on: “Well then, it’s no secret that our basic product is office
equipment and that our products and services are means to promote that
equipment. We try to integrate our approaches completely. That is, the
problem dictates its solution, the chosen method of operation is what
designs a machine or a component. If you came to us asking if one of our
systems would sell oranges, say, or move merchandise or establish a
Matto Grosso market or test consumer response equally well in Prague as
in Bangkok, why, we would devise the best possible approach to the
problem and take that one step further—the one that makes us, if I may
say so at last, unique. We actually enter the field. We take the risks,
we do the work, we find out if the approach is optimum. And if there
seems to be a better way we try that too. When that happens, it is
frequently the case that a new office machine or method is called for,
which is why we say that ‘your problems design our equipment.’ ”

“And how do your customers—prospects—feel about your incursions into
their fields? Especially the successful ones?”

“Mr. Merrihew,” said Mr. Handel, as if explaining not the phenomena, but
the very fact of day-and-night, “they know we will withdraw.”

Merrihew lifted one eyebrow—somehow a much more potent gesture than the
elevation of Mr. Handel’s two. “Don’t you sometimes find it a little
tempting to stay with a nice new fruitful operation?”

“One need not yield to temptation,” Mr. Handel said primly. “Our central
concern is office systems—and we try hard not to forget it.”

“Then you can’t lose.”

“As long as everything works as it is designed to work.”

“Ah,” said Merrihew. “Now we come to the problem.”

“Now we come to the problem. For you can see how essential, how
absolutely vital, in a small but highly diversified operation such as
ours, is the matter of retrieval—immediate, reliable retrieval of the
information stored in our banks and available from outside. For not only
do our operations depend on retrieval, but each operation, each sequence
in each operation, is a demonstration of our systems and is on display.
I have my own special nightmare, Mr. Merrihew,” said Mr. Handel, running
a controlled finger around the back and side of his collar—a small
movement, but in this bright, intense little man, a signal of submerged
fatigue and terrible tension. “I have this nightmare in which some Very
Important Person stands behind Mr. Samm of our Math division and
witnesses Samm’s request for a certain set of figures—and there is a
click from the console and from the slot comes something like this—”
From the capacious attaché case beside him on the seat he drew a sheaf
of papers and slid them across to Merrihew. A typical M&H duplication,
with crisp typography and in vivid colors, it was an excessively
specific illustrated article entitled “Alternatives to the Posterior
Colpotomy.” Under it was another called “Management of Abscesses of the
Lower Mandibular Arch.” There was more, and worse. Merrihew lifted the
stack, banged the edge of it against the table to align the papers and
carefully turned the whole thing face down. His eye fell on his
half-empty coffee cup and with an infinitely eloquent gesture he pushed
it away from him.

“The nightmare,” said Mr. Handel hoarsely, “actually came two-thirds
true. The only important element missing was the Very Important Person.”
He informed a discreet shudder and then displayed another many-leaved
paper. “ ‘Hostility and Aggression, A Radical Approach,’ ” he read.
“This arrived on the desk of our marketing director in response to a
request for trade information on the South Island of New Zealand. These,
of course, are gross examples. In a way I’m far more worried about the
little ones. You can see the big ones. I don’t have to describe to you
the possibilities of one misplaced decimal point, or the inaccurate
reporting of a single raw-material supply in some of the more complex
projections we get into.”

“I get the picture. Now, how often is this happening?”

“That,” said Mr. Handel, “is the most troublesome thing of all. I have
here a chart of the incidence of these, ah, events—dates, times,
locations of demand and points of retrieval—and as much as one can
express as to the nature of the, ah, irregularities, and as you can see
at a glance, they are about as nearly random as such things could
possibly be—in frequency, quality, kind, importance and every other
factor.”

“And your circuitry-tapes, disks, all that?”

Another thick sheaf joined the growing mound on the table. “That’s one
area we can practically eliminate,” Mr. Handel said with confidence and
more than a little pride, “These are M&H installations, naturally, in an
M&H environment and maintained and inspected by M&H personnel. We are on
display at all times, Mr. Merrihew, through and through. Our weekly
maintenance is more thorough than you’d find elsewhere twice a year and
our engineers know their jobs. As for the computers and their
satellites, most are self-checking and run their own diagnostics
periodically. No, Mr. Merrihew, we won’t find the trouble there.”

“I think you’re right. We won’t,” said Merrihew, with a positiveness
that apparently startled the co-president.

“You sound, suddenly, as if you had solved the problem.”

“Oh, I have,” said Merrihew. He reached for the chart of events and
glanced at it again. “It’s just that knowing what’s wrong isn’t enough.
I want to know _why_.”

“I—don’t quite follow you, Mr. Merrihew.”

“I know that, Mr. Handel. Now, here’s what I want you to do. When I come
to see you tomorrow morning, don’t let me.”

“I—beg your pardon?”

“Don’t get rid of me either. Just stall. All right?”

“Mr. Merrihew, would you mind telling me—”

“I’d mind a lot. Now I have to go think. See you tomorrow, Mr. Handel.”
He rose and slid out of the booth and added the word: “Ultimately.” He
left.

Mr. Handel sat where he was, motionless and speechless and for a long
moment without even thought, until at length he stirred, picked up his
documents—and, of course, the check—and went back to the office.

Suave was the word: the room was suave. The lighting was gentle and
varied, tasteful and flattering. Sound went where one desired it to go
and was swallowed up everywhere else. There was a sense of pleasant
disorientation, for the walls, and to a very subtle degree the floor,
were not perfectly flat and there was no special place or line where
wall became ceiling. In a strange way one seemed not to be indoors at
all as much as in another country. Most of the light in the room changed
color, but only slightly and with the wonderful gradualness of an
aurora, for one does not see the change; one must look away and look
back again to be able to know it at all. Yet the light was steady and
clear where it should be so—around the wide soft benches and their
displays of literature (current magazines, “coffee-table” art books and,
nowhere in sight but by no means out of reach, discreetly startling M&H
promotions) and equally steady and warm near the two mirrors. Clever
touch, that, thought Merrihew.

But no one, on entering the reception room at M&H, could count the
instruments of this symphony of subtleties, most especially when Miss
Kuhli was at her console.

Miss Kuhli (Merrihew had heard it “Cooley” the day before, and had built
quite a different picture) was Eurasian. Not since the perfection of
ferro-concrete and its self-stressed freedom has architecture been able
to match the construction of such eyelids and supraorbital arches as
those with which Miss Kuhli had been born. Her hands seemed to be the
cooperative work of a florist and a choreographer. Her body had not been
designed, but inspired, and her hair was such that it could not be
believed at a single glance. She dressed with the studied spontaneity of
the highest possible high fashion, of which Merrihew had once cynically
remarked, _If the eardrum ever becomes taboo, high fashion will find a
way to give you a glimpse of it_. All of which was quite secondary to
Miss Kuhli’s voice. Correction. It wasn’t solely the voice. It was the
instrument and the skill, the genius with which it was played. “Good
morning,” she said as Merrihew entered, and he all but responded, _Thank
you—oh, thank you_—just because she cared to give him all her attention,
all her time while she was saying it.

“Good morning.”

“Is there anything I can do for you?” she asked with tastefully
controlled eagerness.

Offhand, Merrihew could think of twelve ways to answer that question and
was strongly inclined to use all of them. But he said, “I’d like to see
Mr. Handel.”

Her eyes flicked swiftly to what could only have been an appointment
list; but the way she did it could be translated by any wishful visitor
as—just possibly—a wink. “I’ll see if he’s in yet. Your name is—”

“Merrihew.”

“Mr. Merrihew!” she said through a warm quick smile. One would think she
had been waiting for months for this meeting. “Lois,” she said to the
holoscreen on her console. “Is Mr. Handel there yet? Mr. Merrihew’s
here.” The way she spoke it Merrihew’s name was in a slightly larger
type than the rest of the sentence—but discreetly not italicized. The
punctuation at the end was something more emphatic than a period but
nothing as gross as an exclamation point.

The screen asked if Mr. Merrihew could wait. Merrihew could. He squinted
against the flashbulb radiance of Miss Kuhli’s smile and went to one of
the benches (if it was a bench) against the wall (if it was a wall)
where he might best watch the action.

And action there was. Miss Kuhli’s console (on which was affixed a
polite but monumentally expensive small bronze plate, in lowercase
italics: _agnes kuhli_) was so placed that it was not a barrier between
herself and the world. At the same time it was not exactly included in
the waiting room. One might call it half-surround, a construct of such a
nature that it was a convenience for her to occupy it, while clearly the
lesser of comforts to anyone else. Seated, she was not concealed, and to
a degree shared the space as one might share a living room. Yet her
operating point was hers and no one else’s.

People came. People went. People waited. Merrihew very soon observed,
with a small cynical slap on his own wrist, that Miss Kuhli’s eager
recognition of strangers and her warm willingness to help had not been
for him alone. She surely was among the best in the world at what she
did, and this special thing she did better than anyone he had ever seen.
But he did indulge himself in a childish moment of regret …

She was never hurried and never at a loss. It took some time for the
casual observer (which Merrihew certainly was not) to realize that
reception was a very small part of what she did. Her console was
constantly active—soft lights and whispers, little flashings and
murmurings, to each of which she responded according to its demand. At
times she seemed to sink into a species of meditation—hands clasped on
her knee, eyes downcast—and during those times it would take a practiced
eye as sharp as Merrihew’s to divine that she was speaking and that this
was no mantric interval—any more than the occasional rhythmic
manipulation of the simply designed, glittering little ornament at her
throat was meditative.

Therefore, while anyone might walk in and find an extremely restful,
beautifully decorated room commanded by a startlingly pretty young woman
at ease on a comfortable bench, a young woman who would put him at his
ease unhurriedly, share his concerns for a moment, do what needed doing
and then apparently retire quietly into her thoughts, there was actually
a great deal more going on. In the moments between the ebbs and flows of
people—who waited, who left, who delivered, who received, who were
directed and ushered; who were greeted by suddenly appearing personnel
from inside and led away, and who, twice that morning, included herds of
awed children being given a tour through the plant—in these lulls when
there was no one there but Merrihew and Agnes Kuhli (and each time she
acknowledged this remote intimacy with a charming smile; never for a
second did she seem unaware of him) his sharp ears extracted from the
miracles of sound-absorbency around her some of the flood of detail she
was handling. Flickers and pulses from little lights, quick touches from
her long hands on illuminations and patches which could only be
electrostatic switches, and the occasional radiance of the holoscreen,
each elicited its quick manual or vocal response. Not that her every
minute was crowded—far from it. It was in one of the occasional lulls
that their eyes met—he saw to that, keeping his gaze fixed on her in
peril of drying his eyeballs—and she gave him that incredible, sharing
smile and said, “My—he’s keeping you here so long—” So caring, so
concerned. “Here, I’ll just—”

Her fingers flickered on the console and her face was palely lit by the
glow from the holoscreen, which was not in his view. “Lois, Mr.
Merrihew’s been waiting so long—”

Lois, as expected, said whatever needed to be said and the glow died.
“Something came up,” Miss Kuhli commiserated, “and Mr. Handel would like
you to wait just a little longer, if you don’t mind.”

“I don’t mind,” Merrihew said heartily. He rose and approached her.
“Miss Kuhli, would you mind very much showing me some of the things that
console does? I’ve been watching you work and—”

“Of course I don’t mind!” she cried, this time with a real exclamation
point. “That’s what I’m here for. What would you like to know?” As she
spoke an amber light showed on what seemed to be a solid piece of
hand-rubbed walnut. Her hand hovered over it a moment and then stroked
it. It disappeared.

“Well, practically everything,” said Merrihew. “What was that, for
example?” He pointed to the spot where the amber glow had been.

“Oh, Mr. Stamm isn’t going out for lunch and he wants it sent in.”

“That little light said all that?” She tinkled a laugh. “No, _he_ did.”

“I didn’t hear anything.”

“Naturally not.” She lifted away some of her shining hair and revealed
an ear which had obviously been designed by whomever it is that holds
the patent on the chambered nautilus. Resting in the orifice was a
glittering little gem of a device. There were no wires or brackets or
anything else of the kind. “It’s my personal receiver. I have one in the
other ear too. Sometimes it’s nice to hear with both ears but I can use
either one—or both on two lines, if I have to.”

“Microrange FM,” Merrihew deduced.

“Yes! And I answered him the same way.” She pointed to the jewel at her
throat.

“You spoke to him?”

“Yes, I asked him if he’d like the usual and he said yes and thanked me
and I said goodbye.”

“All the time you were talking to me?”

“Well—between talking to you.”

“Subvocals—is that it?”

“You do know a lot about it!” she said admiringly. Another amber spot
showed on the board and she put out her hand. This time she touched the
board right under the glow and it turned red. “I put him on ‘hold,’ ”
she explained. She waved at the end of the board and the bright numerals
of a digital clock appeared (remaining in sight five seconds and then
disappearing) and she said “It’s Mr. Damiani in Design. He’s been
waiting all morning for hand delivery of some special components and
he’ll be wanting to know if they’ve arrived. I’ll tell him no, not yet
and I’ll send them up the instant they arrive—and shall I call the
factory again. Watch.”

He leaned closer while she touched the red into amber. She smiled (and
he recalled how many ventriloquists maintain a smile the whole time the
dummy is talking) and he was aware of the slightest possible murmur of
her voice, the barest motion of her lips. Even forewarned, however, he
could not distinguish the words. When she had finished he said, meaning
it, “That’s one of the most amazing things I’ve ever seen in my life.”
You also smell wonderful, he added, but not aloud.

“It isn’t hard to learn,” she said deprecatingly. “I don’t suppose it’s
necessary, either, but you can see how nice it is in an open office like
this—no bells and ’scuse-me’s and plugs and wires. And it’s the best
possible demonstration of our new VIP. That’s V.I.P.—Voice InPut
system.”

“What’s that?”

“Well, the VIP System, the new M&H Computer Central. We centralize all
the office functions—well, almost all—into one computer, but it’s very
special. We have access to it by voice. Some day,” she went on with
heart-stopping enthusiasm (oh, my, thought Merrihew, it’s so easy to
listen to this lady without hearing a thing: she is her own diversion,
bless her), “we hope to be able to perfect a VIP system with access
points all over an office. At this stage it’s geared to operate through
one person.”

“You.”

“And two others, with another girl in training,” she went on. (The
entire time she talked, the board glowed and flashed, her fingers moved,
hovered, touched and rested.) “Look.” She touched a point in the wall
(or whatever it was) at the base of the console, and a drawer slid out.
Inside were four small compartments. One was empty. Each of the others
held two of the jeweled ear-sets and one such ornament as the one she
wore on her throat. She took out one of these.

“Beautiful,” said Merrihew, meaning whatever he meant.

She held up the throat device, meaning that. “There’s no reason it
shouldn’t be. And it really is, inside and out. Really, some of the
microcircuits in this thing are as beautiful as anything a jeweler ever
turned out. I’ll give you some literature on them before you go, if you
like.”

She paused, for the holoscreen lit up. Merrihew could see it now. It was
nothing but a film of frosted plastic, perhaps sixteen by twenty inches
and a very few sixteenths of an inch thick. At first blush one thought
of rear projection, but it was far more than that. It was like looking
into a clear cube of glass in which was not the picture of a girl’s
face, but the girl’s face itself. The pleasant blond apparition asked,
“Aggie, is Mr. Merrihew still there?”

“That’s Mr. Merrihew, looking over my shoulder.”

“Oh,” said the image, looking straight into his eyes, “Hello! I’m Miss
Addamski, Mr. Handel’s secretary. I’m so sorry to keep you like this.
Truly, Mr. Handel will get to you just as soon as he can.”

“That’s all right,” said Merrihew. “I’m in good hands, as you can
plainly see.” Miss Addamski smiled and faded away while Miss Kuhli
(magnificent woman, he thought) managed to laugh at what he had said
without giggling.

“Beautiful holograph.”

“Would you believe Mr. Miroshi’s not pleased with it yet? He still
thinks a lot more can be done with the color rendition.”

“It’s so much better than the passionate pinks and sick greens I’ve been
used to.”

“Oh, thank you. Now, where were we?”

“At the jeweler’s, I think.”

“Oh, yes.” She held up the throat device she had taken from the drawer.
“You’ll notice that all of them are twelve-sided, with a hole in the
center. This is what makes it so quick and easy to learn. You think of a
clock, you see. You pretend you have a clock, or watch on your throat.
Now it’s easy to locate which of the twelve sides is which number—two
o’clock, seven o’clock, and so on. You can use it to dial a telephone
number if you want to, for example, just by switching in here—” she
touched the board and an amber light glowed “—or the intercom system, or
paging, or to retrieve something from the files.”

“I understand that everything stays in the M&H files, and what you
really get is a copy.”

“My! You really do know us. Yes—look, I’ll show you.” She touched the
board, manipulated the jewel at her throat and a ten-by-twelve section
of the board became a projection of a business letter. “That’s for
inspection,” she explained, “just to be sure it’s the one you want
before you reproduce it. If it is, you just …” and she touched the board
at the right place and in five seconds a sheet of paper emerged from a
slot—an exact duplicate of the letter.

“Really amazing. But where does the VIP system come in?”

“Oh, I had to show you the old way first.” She beamed. “Would you like
to see that letter again, or another?”

“Let’s try another one.”

At that moment, a young man came in with a small package. Almost
simultaneously, it seemed, a startlingly pretty young girl emerged from
an inner door, took and signed for the package while the young man ogled
her and Miss Kuhli, his head moving like that of an aficionado of table
tennis, Miss Kuhli the while asking after his sick mother. And while
this was going on the image of another letter appeared on the small
screen. Miss Kuhli caught Merrihew’s nod, touched her control and by the
time the young man and the secretary were gone the new letter was in his
hands.

“I feel foolish,” said Merrihew, “like the audience of a magic act. How
did you do that? I mean, when?”

Clearly she was enjoying herself. “Between the time I said hello to him
and the time I asked after his mother. While he was handing the package
to Sue.”

“You never touched your throat mike.”

“I used it, though. I switched here—” she showed him “—to activate the
VIP, and then I simple told it the code/number of the letter I wanted.”

“Subvocally.”

“Yes, it seemed the best way at the time. But I didn’t have to. Oh, Mr.
Stamm’s lunch—unfinished business. I can show you with that. Now, what I
must do is call the restaurant. Let’s say I don’t know the number. I
could look it up. Or I could—” she fingered the throat jewel “—call
Information. Or I could use VIP. Like this—” and she touched a spot on
the board. “VIP, what’s the number of the Blue Corner Restaurant?”

Before the words were out of her mouth the telephone number appeared in
brightline numerals. “But I can do better than that.” She canceled her
board, keyed VIP, and demanded: “Get me the Blue Corner.” Instantly the
holoscreen lit up and they were looking at a young man in a blue apron,
with all the surprising dimensionality of the M&H holoscreen. “Blue
Corner. Oh,” said the young man, lighting up much as the screen had
done. “Miss Kuhli! How are you, Miss Kuhli?”

“Fine, Ronnie. Ronnie, Mr. Stamm’s eating in today. Will you send over
the usual, a quarter to one?”

Devoutly, Ronnie vowed he would, waited for and got a Kuhli smile and
rang off. “Marvelous,” said Merrihew, and could think only to repeat the
jaded word. “Marvelous. What you’ve done here at long last is to perfect
the old impossible idea one finds in those silly science-fiction
stories—the computer you can talk to, the robot that acts on spoken
command.”

“Mr. Miroshi says we have never perfected anything,” said Miss Kuhli,
“We merely produce the best. We’re really a long way from the computer
one can talk to, the way I’m talking to you. And as you see, we still
have to acquaint the computer with a certain person—” she touched the
jewel at her throat “—before it can be expected to respond reliably. VIP
has to know a person’s way of phrasing, the, diction, the normal
vocabulary and what to accept in variations of emphasis. Poor VIP can’t
spell at all, you know. We still have to write our own letters, but he
does make it a lot easier. Let me show you.”

She brought out her typewriter, an act that consisted of pulling out
from the edge of the console a fingerboard no, more than half an inch
thick and pushing it inward again, which, with a click, made it assume
the slight slant of the conventional keyboard and apparently complete
rigidity. “It can afford to be as thin as this,” she explained. “It’s
all electrostatic switches. The other parts are all in the computer.”
She touched the ON point, which lit up, along with the same screen on
which he had seen the files. “Now we get some help from VIP,” she said.
She activated the system and said “Letterhead and date, please.”

They appeared on the screen.

“To?”

“Mr. Handel. From me.”

“To Mr. Handel, VIP.” Neatly, in three lines properly spaced, there
appeared on the screen Mr. Handel’s name and title, room number, street
address and zip code. A triple space and then: Dear Mr. Handel:

“Wow,” said Merrihew, impressed yet again. He then began to dictate.
Miss Kuhli’s fingers flew. In a way it was eerie, for the typewriter
made not the slightest sound, and there was no carriage, no paper,
nothing but the shining words appearing on the screen one by one as he
spoke. They were:

I have confirmed, and in a matter of minutes will prove to your
satisfaction, that the source of the difficulty we discussed yesterday
is in my present location.

No one is perfect, Mr. Handel, and the closest you can get to perfection
is, as your partner remarked, to achieve the best there is at any
moment. I concede that you have done this.

What I think you have overlooked is that your VIP system is set up for a
perfect input. No person is perfect because no person is anyone single
thing. Mood and pressure can turn one facet or another of a person to
the front, despite the determination of that person not to let that
happen. How easily it happens depends upon the person, but for everyone
there is a point, a degree of pressure, at which the turn will occur and
another “person” will present itself. But not quite another person, you
see. To a computer finely tuned to one individual this must present a
perplexing development. It can then only do what any of us do when
perplexed—that is, make a good guess.

There is a common denominator in the two documents you showed me—the
medical report delivered to your Math section and the treatise on
aggression and hostility. Unless I am seriously in error—and I am
not—Math was looking for a certain regular series of figures, probably
daily, in the preparation of a graph of some sort. VIP was asked for
“abcissas” and came up with “abscesses.” In the other case a request for
information on the _antipodes_ got a response which concerned
_antipathies_. There is only one place in the world where each of these
couples is pronounced almost identically, and that is in the part of New
York City known as the West Bronx.

“Why—I was born in the West Bronx!” exclaimed Miss Kuhli.

“Think of that,” said Merrihew. “Shall we go on?”

They went on.

One of the many facets of the human being capable of being turned to the
front under stress is the blind spot, Mr. Handel. The fact that every
one of the troublesome events you listed occurred on the same shift,
with the same operator, completely escaped you and everyone else who saw
the list. Doubtless it would have escaped me as well had I met Miss
Kuhli before I saw it instead of afterward. As I dictate this it also
becomes clear that in spite of the distress this matter has caused you,
and the thoroughness of your investigation, no one to this moment has
checked with her. No one, least of all Miss Kuhli, would even begin to
believe she could do any wrong.

“Now let’s hold it right there, Mister,” said Agnes Kuhli harshly. “I
work hard and I do the best I know how, so what kind of con is this ‘do
any wrong’?”

“Miss Kuhli,” said Merrihew gently, “your West Bronx is showing.” She
glared at him hotly for a long moment. He held her gaze and radiated as
much calm as he could. Merrihew could, when he cared to, radiate a great
deal of it. She subsided from fury to sullenness and took her eyes away
to scan down the words on the screen. “Never in life,” she growled—it
was a real growl—“could I get so uptight that I’d make such a stupid—”
Her voice trailed off as she fixed her brilliant eyes on a word.
“ ‘Antipodes.’ Oh. Oh, that was the time he—” Surprisingly,
delightfully, she colored to the earlobes.

“You don’t have to tell me or anyone about it. But you were under
stress, right? And VIP took your _antipodes_ as _antipathies_ and gave
Marketing a psychiatric lecture instead of a trade report.”

“And the other time, the abscissas. That was when he threatened me that
if I didn’t—”

“Shh,” he interrupted. “I don’t have to know as long as you do.” He
waved a hand. “Type.”

Office efficiency dictates that an office chair be designed to avoid low
back pains. The comfort and well-being of the employee is important, of
course, but the truly basic thrust is the accommodation of the whole
human being to the office environment. VIP is so sophisticated that such
a simple basic can be overlooked. Unless and until VIP can be programmed
to respond unfailingly to its operator in any mood—laughing, furious,
frightened, weary—it should be used only in periods of complete calm.
Unless VIP can accommodate all the facets of a human being—the
irrational child, the bigot, the daydreamer, the wishful thinker, the
spring-feverish, as well as it does the carefully schooled office
presence, I recommend that it go back to the drawing boards until it
can.

You’ll get my bill in the morning. Right now I’m taking Miss Kuhli to
lunch.

MERRIHEW



INGENIOUS AYLMER


Ejler Edgar Aylmer (nobody has a name like Ejler Edgar Aylmer) had this
inheritance and this basement workshop. They had come to him in that
order and both were enormous. I dropped in one day to borrow a turret
lathe and there he was, fiddling with the controls of a Z-shaped
console. I had to thump him before he could answer me, because of the
helmet. “Oh, hi,” he said. “It’s my reorganizer.”

“What’s it do?”

“I’ll show you.” Replacing the helmet, he punched rapidly on a terminal
keyboard. Then he pulled a knobbed stick marked REORG, and it was
lights-out for the machine. He took off the helmet and looked around.
“How about that!” he said, mighty pleased.

“How about what?” I said, which made him roar with glee. He then asked
me how many hours there are in a day. I looked down at my fingers and
said, “Fourteen.”

“Okay. And who rules the United States?”

“The Royal Council, of course,” I said, correctly bobbing from the
knees.

“And if I told you that when you walked in here you had eight fingers
and two thumbs, and General Superfudd was Our Leader?”

I counted my fingers. “You better explain that to me, Ejler Edgar.”

“Well, I can’t, not really. But I can give you an analogy. Consider the
whole universe a kind of computer bank. The computer can make every bit
of information in it consistent with every other bit, by rearranging
them. When you come up with an impossible bit—pigs with wings, say—it is
ordinarily rejected as impossible nonsense. But if you put it into this
terminal, the universe has to accept it no matter what, and will
reorganize the whole universe, if necessary, to make it a fact. Pull the
handle, and you’ll be living with real winged pigs.”

I looked at the machine and didn’t believe it. “Try it yourself,” said
Ejler Edgar. “But put on the helmet, otherwise you won’t be able to
remember how the universe was before you reorganized it.”

I put on the helmet, thought a moment, then typed out on the console the
most impossible thing I could think of: MIRRORS REVERSE IMAGES RIGHT TO
LEFT BUT NOT UP TO DOWN. At his nod, I pulled the big handle.

Everything kind of _blinked_, and I was standing in an empty cellar
wearing that stupid helmet. I looked at my hands, I still had eight
fingers and two thumbs, but now they’re on two hands, for God’s sake,
and there are 24 hours in a day, and what’s-his-name’s in the White
House, and every time I look in a mirror it reverses everything right to
left, but not up to down. Try it yourself.

And there’s nobody to explain it to me. As I said, nobody has a name
like Ejler Edgar Aylmer. Nobody.



THE SHERIFF OF CHAYUTE


The town came out of its houses, the propped-up weathered ones and the
ones with the newly planted white pickets, out of the mercantile and the
livery and even the Bat’s Wing, and stood in the wide flat dusty street
to watch the cloud in the southeast. They’d known for a week it would
come, but it should have come yesterday, and they couldn’t understand
that. Billy Willow, who ran the mercantile, said so to the sheriff.

Ev Charger was the sheriff of Chayute, a gangly, ice-eyed man with the
knack of keeping his heartbeat slow. He contemplated the cloud and
couldn’t understand either why it was a day late. “But anyhow, no use
hopin’ they won’t come,” he said, and with those words set himself like
a clock, knowing what the message would have to be as the hours went by.

A lady stopped and called out from the duckboards: “You, Ev Charger,
mind you keep a sharp eye on those—those ruffians. Chayute isn’t what it
was, and they’d best learn that. We will not tolerate—”

“Yes ma’am,” the sheriff said evenly. From between Mrs. Finnan’s bright
china teeth, and out of her dried-apricot face, had come the same public
speech a week ago, and this would be the eleventh time since. Billy said
sharply, “Now, Martha, when the sheriff comes into your place an’ tells
you how much a yard to sell dimity, you’ve a right to tell him how to
run his business. Did he do that yet?”

Mrs. Finnan sniffed and did not respond to that, but said, “A blessing
when the railroad goes through,” and walked on. Charger wondered about
that. The railroad wouldn’t come within forty miles of Chayute, and the
word had been around for years now that more and more cattle were riding
to market, arriving rested and soft. It would mean the end of the big
drives for sure. Chayute would survive with farms and maybe the mine but
it would be a very different breed of town. Well it already was. Billy
was saying, “I’d be a devil’s damfool to call that a blessing.” A cattle
drive meant a lot to the mercantile and the saloon and a couple other
kinds of places, though a lot of the rest would keep their doors open
only out of a sort of defiance. And given their druthers, half the
houses in Chayute would like to have boarded up their shutters or
gophered clear underground. Then “Priss,” snapped Billy Willow, “you
come here.”

The prettiest girl in town, yes and prettier than anything in the next
four towns north and three east, stepped off the duckboards and came to
her daddy. Billy was a laughter-beaten, weather-wrinkled little hickory
stick of a man, and for all his endless good nature, his kids obeyed him
in a way that would be the envy of a colonel in the cavalry. Ev Charger
was going to ask Billy one day how that was done. “Yes, Daddy.”

Billy peered into the glowing face. Priss Willow had skin smooth as a
new-blown magnolia and there’s a western tree called jacaranda which
blooms a unique blue with lavender in it: Priss Willow’s eyes. “You got
color on, girl?”

She got some then. “Oh no, Daddy.”

Billy peered close again. “Well good then. Go help your maw.”

“Yes, Daddy.” She smiled shyly at the sheriff, which made him want to
blink his eyes, and they watched her move away—a pleasure. She’d a way
of moving unlike other folk, who just have to move up and down a little
with each step. She did not.

Ev Charger thought to ask then and there, “How do you get your kids to
mind you so, Billy? For sure it wasn’t with a willow switch.”

“Oh, I been known to wave one,” said Billy, and laughed. Then he saw it
was a straight question. Younguns grow yeast in their veins at a certain
time, and the bubbles come in a lot of ways, not all of them good. The
town had had its fair share of this in recent days as cattle became less
to it and crops and the mine more, and they had to put a third room on
the schoolhouse and those neat little pickets began to show along the
street. Some of this yeasting became sheriff’s business, and what to do
was forever a puzzler.

Billy said, “No kid’s a bad kid, whatever they say about blood. If you
believe that, they know it and don’t get bad. Only other thing you got
to do is give ’em something that says ‘thus far you can go, an’ no
farther.’ It really don’t make no difference what it is, you know.
There’s got to be a wall around ’em somewhere. Somepin for ’em to kick
against. They call it a wall but they know it’s a shelter.” He came
closer to talk privately, laughed again and said, “I don’t give a hoot
owl’s holler if Priss powders up a bit, leastwise not more’n her maw
does, but she don’t know that.”

They stood together watching the loom of the dust cloud over the
late-lit southwest hills. Charger knew from the talk that they were both
thinking the same thing, talking about the same thing—in the middle of
that cloud was a hard-jawed kid name of Hank Shadd, yes and the old man
who had made him what he was. Nobody ever built a wall around Hank,
unless it was all those things that go to make a man out of a boy. And
it was Olman Shadd’s idea of what makes a man—that is, to know what you
want and go for it in straight lines. Two years ago they’d driven
through here and Hank had first seen Priss Willow. Last year he had
first _seen_ her: a sizable difference; and she certainly saw him at the
same time, which was why the color on her face just now, whether or not
it was rouge pot or yeast.

Ev Charger knew the Shadds well and from way back. Olman Shadd was only
a loose handful of years older than Charger, but even when Charger was a
wet-eared calfling they were calling Olman Shadd “the Old Man.” Like a
lot of other lawmen of the time, Charger had cows in his history. His
first drive, and that was a long while back, had been under Olman
Shadd—and Shadd had already bossed four of them, handling a crew of
rannies older, and some bigger than he was. You did what he said because
he never gave an order that didn’t make sense; he knew his country and
his cows and his men. If you couldn’t figure out the sense you did it
anyway, and right now, because he was a man who would back up an order
with fists or feet or bullets if need be, no matter what, even “please
pass the salt.” Ev Charger never ran afoul with him but once, and that
was on his first drive, when he had maybe more enthusiasm than knowledge
or care, and one night tiredly hobbled his roan with a granny knot. It
took him forty daylight minutes to catch his mount the next morning, and
the Old Man waved him up from where he had been riding flank—a real
kindness to an apprentice. “Ride drag,” was all the Old Man said, and
young Ev dropped back and for five days drank dust with his nostrils and
chewed it with his eyelids and spat it out in gritty tears, wading
through cowflop the whole time, and contemplating the craft of
carefulness.

He saw the shape and place of the cloud and said to Billy Willow,
“They’ll be camping by the ford and they should have the cows put to bed
by just past sundown. Reckon they’ll blow in about nine o’clock.”

Yes, nine o’clock, full dark, thirsty and all the rest that goes with
it—and it was Shadd’s way to make up for a tight rein by discarding
bridle and bit when the time came. “It’ll be a noisy night,” said Billy
Willow, with absolute understanding, and went to see to his store.

And it was ten after nine in the darkening town when they first heard
the gunshots—pinpricks of sound lengthening into crooked-y hollow tubes
of it, laying out along the echoing foothills, yes, and hoofbeats and a
lot of idiot yipping. Ev Charger came out of his office and walked
quietly up the boards to the Bat’s Wing, while the townsfolk popped out
of their doors to listen and back in again to hide, like a whole row of
those wooden cuckoos on a Bavarian clock. Charger stepped out into the
street and hung one of his shoulderblades on the high hitching rail in
front of the Bat’s Wing Saloon and waited. Shadd’s men raced in in a
sort of barely controlled stampede, probably because of some brainless
poke’s wager about the last man buying the first drink. That game
somehow got lost at the sight of the sheriff, though all he did was get
his shoulder off the rail and stand up straight.

He looked up at them and nodded. “Howdy, Shadd.”

The Old Man reined close but didn’t begin to dismount. A mounted man has
special advantages. His view is better and his range is wider and it’s
natural (except for a smoothbore bird-killer) to shoot straight or down
rather than upwards. But most of all, he’s looking down on you,
specially if he’s slab-jawed, grizzled, cold-eyed Olman Shadd. “Howdy,
Ev,” he said in a voice like granite sliding on granite. He called the
sheriff by his name, which was a kindness, for after losing his horse
that time Ev Charger had been known as Granny for a hard-fought season.

Charger looked around at the others. Some he knew, had ridden with ’way
back. Billy Oats was there, face blowtorched and hair frosted by the
years, Injun John, Juice Jaw (did he ever have another name? Awake or
asleep he carried a great bulge of tobacco-cud in one side of his face,
and he had a whole vocabulary of spits), Neil was there, absolutely
untouched by all those years, and Adams who had taught him that when you
point your finger at something, even over your shoulder or behind your
back, you do it with surprising accuracy, so that if you lay your index
finger along the barrel of your gun and point, you can shoot off the
back doorknob of a barroom from a batwing doorway. And tight-lipped
young Hank Shadd, of course, looking for someone. Then there were some
more men he didn’t know, and didn’t have to, really, to understand that
they were the same hard riders, hard drinkers, and hardnosed brawlers as
the rest. “Howdy, boys. Juicy. Neil. Hey Injun. Billy …” They grunted
their greetings. Juicy spat pleasure. Then Charger added, “I’ll want
your guns.”

It got very quiet. But for the half-lathered horses, it got so quiet for
so long that Charger had the crazy idea that nobody would move or say a
word at all forever and ever. And the funny thing was, nobody looked at
him. They were all looking at Old Man Shadd. Looking to him.

Shadd said, “What’s that you say?” So the sheriff said it again.

“Why is that, Ev?” the Old Man asked too quietly.

Juicy spat wonderment.

“It’s the law,” said Charger. “Nobody totes iron here after sundown.”

“Wasn’t so last year,” said Shadd.

“Right, sir. Town ordinance. You want to see the book?”

“No, I don’t want to see the book. Take your word.” A sudden something
lit up Shadd’s steady eyes. Juicy recognized it for what it was, and
spat fury. Shadd thumbed a dollar out of his Levi’s and flicked it
ringing into the air and caught it. “Tell you what I’ll do, so we don’t
git into no outnumbered argymint here. You call it, Sheriff, and if you
win the toss we’ll do as you say.”

“Mister Shadd,” said Charger, because if Shadd had to call him Sheriff,
he had to call Shadd Mister. “Mister Shadd, I am just through telling
you what the law is here. Now a law that rests on the turn of a dollar
is no law at all, so I cain’t play it like that.”

Shadd’s nostrils expanded a whole lot and from them there issued a sharp
strong hiss. Charger knew that one well. So did Juicy, who spat danger.
The sheriff held tight until he saw Shadd’s mouth open to say the one
word that would commit everyone to one course or the other, and then cut
in swiftly but softly: ‘Why tote guns? Ain’t you-all the match for
unarmed townsfolk without ’em?” But he smiled a little while he said it.

Shadd exploded with a roar—it was a tense two seconds before anyone
could be sure that the noise was laughter. He was not laughing so much
at the ludicrous picture the sheriff had conjured up as at the ingenuity
of the trap Charger had set for him. With a suddenness that made the
sheriff’s gun-hand cramp, Shadd clapped his hand to his belt … unbuckled
it, handed it down. And before he collected the others, Charger
unbuckled his own. Juicy spat wonderment.

“Have a good time,” said Charger, mounting the walk with his load of
belts.

It was a noisy night. Before it was done everyone hated Ev Charger—or so
he thought. Mrs. Finnan sent word for him to come see her right now, and
what crazy idea he had in his head about her and one of Shadd’s men he
wouldn’t admit even to himself. But she was safe and sound, bolted snug
inside her darkened drygoods, peering out to look for him. When he came
she shot the bolt back, spun him inside and whipped the door to again as
if the invaders were not men but a grasshopper plague. “You’ve got to
stop it,” she said angrily.

“Stop what?”

“All that noise in the saloon.”

“Noise, Miz Finnan?”

“And cursing and swearing.”

“What they been saying, Miz Finnan?”

“You know I wouldn’t repeat any of it!”

“ ’Course not,” said the sheriff. “I just wanted to be sure you heard
anything.”

“You know trail-riders!”

“Yep. Ma’am: Just what did you hear?”

“They were singing,” she said defiantly.

He concentrated very hard on his hat, which his hands were turning round
and round without really being told to. He said, “Miz Finnan, a trail
rider is up an’ around before the sun is. He finds his horse in the dark
an’ most usually he’s got three hours hard work before he gets so much
as a mug o’ coffee. Whatever’s lost he finds. Whatever’s busted he
fixes. He cain’t be everywhere at once but he tries. He rides when it’s
wet, when it’s cold, when it’s both at once an’ muddy to boot. He eats
dust an’ everything in the world smells of cow, an’ he don’t get to town
much at all. An’ when he does, are you goin’ to begrudge him singin’ a
song?”

None of his words were angry words but apparently his tone of voice
betrayed him. He hadn’t shouted but she quailed as if he had, and then
marched to the door and snapped it open. “You’re as bad as they are, Ev
Charger. You used to be one of them and you still are.” He went out and
walked back up the street. He had a funny thought: folks sometimes said
“the face of the city,” in the papers or a book. He’d never thought of
Chayute having a face, and he wondered now if its face looked like
Martha Finnan’s. If it did it was mad at him, and not in any way he
could do anything about.

His office was next door to the doctor’s. The doctor had the only place
in town with a doorway set back from the walk, and someone was in the
doorway. It wasn’t the doctor because the place was dark. Charger paused
and heard a couple of people talking quietly. It was a weird way of
talking:

Priss Willow’s soft smooth voice: “I had five whole years of schoolin’
already, and I’ll get two more at least.”

Hank Shadd, with his father’s grate already begun, but overlaid with
unsureness, shyness: “I didn’t exactly get shot. I got powder burns all
over my hand.”

“Maw says my apple pies as good as hers. She says if I get the trick
with the crust it’ll be better.”

“Woke up in the first light, there’s this diamondback not two feet
away.”

“I could become a dressmaker too, if I wanted. But I druther—no, I won’t
tell you that.”

“Wasn’t coiled up yet so I knew I c’d git to him before that first
strike. So I grabbed him right behind the head.”

“Maw says I should be a schoolteacher. She says schoolteachers git the
best kind of husbands.”

“Helt him to the ground with the one hand, got m’ gun with th’other,
blowed his head off.”

“Daddy’s like that too, but he just likes the idea of me teachin’.”

“Burnt m’hand, scared h—uh, beg pardon, scared the boys half out of
their skin and my dad too.”

Charger went quietly into his office without bothering them, and wagging
his head. Priss a-rambling on one line, Hank on another, and both of
them doubtless thinking something else. He remembered something Billy
once said: “Don’t never listen to a word folks say, Ev—listen to what
they mean.”

He took a medicinal shot from the quart in his bottom drawer, thinking a
little wistfully what it was like in the saloon, not that they’d mind if
he walked in, but it couldn’t be the same. He started out. He didn’t
mean to be extra quiet, or maybe he did.

“They’re sayin’ it’ll all be Herefords and the longhorn’s on the way
out.”

“It was blue with little gores here and some lace.”

“Hereford don’t even look like a beef. Like a oversize dog.”

“Took off the sleeves and put in darts so they’d puff way out.”

“Ride in steam cars like a dude.”

What that really is, Charger thought as he moved upstreet, is railway
talk. The two rails don’t ever meet either, but they get along together
just fine.

Then he began to run. The noise he heard wasn’t a loud one, and he
barely heard it at all what with the bumbling roar issuing from the
saloon. It was one short syllable, but the kind of forced, sharp sound
that means trouble.

He ran past the saloon and up to the livery. In the dark mouth of the
entrance was a flicker of movement, and hard breathing. Two figures were
locked together back there in the spilled hay, and as Charger slid to a
halt one of them—Barney, the livery’s owner—broke free and dived toward
him. No, not to him, but to the shelf over the bill table. He reached
between two account books and his hand came out with a gun in it. He
whirled toward the other man, who was on his feet ready to rush.

Charger had a hard arm around Barney’s throat and the other hand on his
gun wrist before anyone, including the sheriff, knew he had moved. “Drop
it, Barney. Drop it!”

“I’ll kill the—”

“The hell you will.” Charger gave a sudden surge, bent the elbow,
surprisingly released the grip across Barney’s neck and used the freed
hand to take the gun.

The other man was one of Shadd’s riders, one that Charger didn’t know.
He was a tall thin one, round-shouldered and gaunt, and he was wall-eyed
mad. Not so much that he couldn’t check himself, though. “What’s this
about?”

“Come in here an’ found him stealin’.”

The gaunt man took a leaping pace nearer—but stopped. “You’re a stinkin’
liar,” he said, and knocked wet off his chin with the back of his hand.
He spoke to Ev: “I come in here and knocked and hollered and there
wasn’t nobody. All I wanted was oats for my hoss, he hasn’t had good
grazing in three days now. An’ this bastard comes out of no place and
licks me with a ax-handle.”

Charger didn’t believe him. With total enthusiasm he did not believe
him. On the other hand who was to prove the truth? And if Barney came by
for a look and saw a stranger fanning through the back bins, who could
blame him? But then—he wasn’t going to think of what would have happened
in Chayute that night if a town man had shot a rider he himself had
disarmed.

“You get on back to the saloon,” he told the rider. “Barney, you’ll get
your gun back in the mornin’. No guns after sundown means you too.”

They both opened their mouths to protest, looked at each other and then
at Charger, who wasn’t holding the gun on them but sure hadn’t put it
away. The rider spat near their feet and went on back to the saloon.

“You shouldn’ta gone for this, Barney.”

“Guess you’re right, Ev, but what would _you_ do?”

Charger grinned briefly. “Same thing.” He clapped Barney’s shoulder and
went out. A running man half-knocked him off his feet. “Billy, f’God’s—”

This was a Billy Willow he’d never seen before, out of breath, frantic.
He clutched at Charger’s leather vest. “Priss’s gone!”

“Now you jus’ git yourself together an’ come along with me.”

Billy began to shout. “I didn’t raise that girl to run with the likes of
that sprat of Olman Shadd’s. I tell you he’s going to deal with me, I’ll
see to it he never fouls my nest or anyone else’s. He—”

“Now hush,” said Charger, but it didn’t work, or not soon enough. Three
Shadd men had been drawn out of the saloon by the ruckus, and one of
them was the Old Man himself.

“I’ll handle it,” Charger said as he propelled Willow on by. It came out
like a warning.

“ ‘Likes of that sprat of Olman Shadd’s?’ ” The Old Man turned to a
rider. “You hear something like that?”

It was Juicy, who spat yes.

Charger pointed into the doctor’s doorway. “There you go, Billy.” And
immediately there emerged a frightened Priss and a lowering Hank.
Charger flicked a glance behind him. The three had followed them, and
more besides.

Billy Willow snatched the girl by the shoulders and whirled her half
around. “You git yourself home and go to your room. I’ll deal with you
later.” With a terrified look at Hank, the girl fled. Billy whirled on
the blinking boy. “As for you, you rotten randy little goat, you’ll stay
away from my Priss or you’ll answer to me. If ever I see you—”

“Stop right there, Billy,” Charger said coldly. He had never in his life
spoken to this wise, happy little man like this, but then it was a Billy
he’d never seen before.

Then the Old Man was there like a tidal wave curling and about to break.
To Billy he grated, “He really ain’t good enough for her, that it? Well,
let me tell you something, he don’t need to sniff around any
pasty-faced, bandy-legged—”

“You too, Shadd,” snapped Charger, and found himself immensely
astonished. “Anything you say now you’ll wish you hadn’t in the mornin’
an’ you both know it.”

Young Hank Shadd spoke up. “I’m here to tell you I never—” and as if the
same string had pulled them the sheriff and both fathers told him to
shut his mouth. And that was the end of it until the next afternoon, for
after one more sullen round, the riders picked up their weapons and left
town.

Charger was in his office poring over the county chart when the kid ran
in with the bad news. The sheriff had been at it for an hour and a
half—he didn’t really know why. Maybe it was because of the trail-riders
last night. Nobody but a damn fool stays with the trails year after
year—which is why every drive had its share of damn fools—but like
railroading or going to sea or some other things you never did quite get
all the grit pumped out of your blood. Charger liked where he was and
what he was doing, but all the same some small part of him went jingling
out with them to the smell of cow and the brainless bawling, and the
good ache of a long hard day, and trail food sauced by a real working
man’s appetite.

His finger traced the old trail up from the lush land to the southwest
which had bred the herd. He knew those hills, and that alkali
patch—twice he’d had stampede crossing that, when the steers smelt the
waterhole. Yonder was the place he picked off a cougar with one shot,
and saved a calf. Over there the ford that was flooded when they got to
it, and still they beat across and lost only seven head.

And here the black new marks on the chart, the rail line. Crews had
pioneered the roadbed last summer and would have the rails in this year,
and that would be about the end of the old trail. They’d brought in
powder gangs and blasted through a hogback—now that would’ve been a
blessing back in his day. Look how the trail had to wind, better than
forty miles around. Now you could drive your steers straight through and
save a day, or would until the rails were in.

Save a day. Days were money. Shadd had lost a day, somewhere.

Somewhere? Right there! He put his finger on the place. Old Man Shadd
had unaccountably crossed the railroad right-of-way and kept with the
long looping old trail, instead of cutting through. You’d think he’d
jump at the chance to use the new road, after what the new road was
doing to the old ways he was so hitched to.

Charger was wagging his head in puzzlement over this when the kid burst
in. “Mister Kelly says Hank Shadd is in the saloon, he’s been drinkin’
and workin’ up a mad.”

The whole thing came to Charger in a single blaze. Once he had been
inside the skin of a lad like that, and he knew—he knew as if he had
been through last night and this morning, every second of it, along with
Hank Shadd. Aggrieved, insulted, called names and told to shut up … yes,
and in love to boot; and with “be a man” as his weaning-pap, every day
of his life until now. Only nobody really ever told him how. So the
kidding, the new name—what would they call him? Randy? Billy goat?
Probably he had to fight a couple of them last night and this morning.
And the Old Man wouldn’t be much help. “Ride drag,” is all he’d say.
Yes, and back he’d go, and he’d be mad, and he’d think of a flower-face
and let the beef clatter past him, stay behind, ride to town, try to be
a man by drinking up his mad.

Charger snatched up his gun-belt and ran, strapping it around him. He
knew where to go—the mercantile. He stopped near it to knot the thong
around his thigh, and by the time he straightened up there was Hank
Shadd, mounted and sitting too straight. Charger called him but he
wouldn’t hear. Hank ranged up before the mercantile and called out in a
choked voice, “Willow!”

Billy Willow’s head appeared at the door and popped back again.

“Send her out, Willow. I got something to say to her.”

An upstairs window swung open and there was the magnolia face, crinkled,
the jacaranda eyes horrified. And Billy Willow stamped out on the
duckboards, a graying bantam—Billy with a gun-belt on!

“She has nothing to say to you. Now git.”

“She’s comin’ out or I’m comin’ in.” He stepped his horse a pace closer.

Billy hung his hand over his holster. His voice was thick, and the veins
at the sides of his neck stood out like fence-posts. “Try getting’ past
me an’ you’re dead.”

Upstreet, the sound of hooves galloping in.

The window above was empty.

“If that’s really it, then,” said the boy, and went for his gun. There
was a hoarse grating shout just behind Charger, but he paid it no mind.
He drew and shot Hank Shadd out of his saddle. He put away his gun
before he turned and saw the Old Man spring down from a wheezing mount
and run to the boy. He wasn’t there ahead of Priss Willow, though. The
girl was down beside him, his head in her lap, and she had a fine proud
glare of disgust for Ev Charger and all the world besides.

Shadd knelt briefly by the wounded man and then stood up and turned to
face the sheriff.

“Shoulder,” he said. And he said to the girl, “Will you watch over him?”

She put her arms around Hank’s head. Behind her, Ev could see a
shocked-sober Billy Willow raise his hands and drop them in defeat. Then
he grinned a little—thank the Powers, Billy Willow’s own old smile. He
came over to where Charger and the Old Man were standing and though
nobody asked him, he said, “I sent her off to bed and it’s the first
time she ever disobeyed me, she slipped away to talk to him there in the
doorway but I didn’t know where she was.”

Nobody asked Shadd to explain either, but he said, “Made him ride drag.
Don’t know why I thought to come back and look, but he was gone and I
knowed he’d come here.”

Charger knew that was as far as either would ever go in the way of
apology. He said, “You raise a young’un to mind you, and one day he
don’t, why, it must be pretty important.”

They all looked at the young couple. The doctor had come out. The Old
Man said, “He’s in good hands. I’ll be by after the drive.”

He mounted his horse and looked down on them. “Hey, Ev,” he said. “I
knew we could make it be just like old times, a shootin’ an’ everything,
and that sheriff we was always lookin’ for, that would back up one of my
boys.” Then he smiled: it was the first Ev Charger had ever seen on that
face. He said something that explained why he had taken the old trail
and scorned the bright easy scar of the railroad right-of-way. “I knew
we could do it—one more time.”

“I’ll buy you a drink,” said Billy Willow, and did, and for the trail
drivers, that was the last of the good old days.



THE MYSTERIUM


“Metaphysics,” said the newsboy, “is a misnomer to begin with, and has
been misunderstood, misused and unappreciated ever since.”

“Ever since what?” demanded the Bump. (She had two aspects, depending.
The other one was the Grind.)

“Ever since a librarian called Andronicus of Rhodes called it that.” He
threw me an aside: “Andronicus was a sort of Köchel to Aristotle.”
Always explaining the obscure with the incomprehensible.

“What’s a cookle?” I asked.

“Not ‘cookle,’ dummy—Köchel,” said the Bump. She had to make her mouth
like kissing to say the name. Nice. “He’s the one that catalogued all of
Mozart’s work.” She turned back to the newsboy. “So about metaphysics.”

“Oh, Aristotle wrote this book called _Physics_. Then he wrote another
book, and Andronicus called it—” he spoke a word which I can’t write
down here, because it was Greek—“which means ‘The treatises after the
treatises on physics.’ The ‘meta-’ means ‘after’—like ‘one thing after
another,’ that’s all. And ever since then people have made it some kind
of foggy set of laws and systems parallel to physics, and’ve mixed it
all up with spiritualism and psychic phenomena and I don’t know what
all. Aristotle’s book wasn’t about any of that.”

“Well, what was it about?”

“Reality.”

I heaved a noisy sigh. “Familiar ground at last.” I hate it when he and
the Bump talk about what I don’t know about and they do.

“Sure,” said the newsboy. He held up two fingers. “Is there a single
thing everything else comes from, or many? Is there a single idea or, he
called it, Spirit, that all ideas come from? That’s what it was about.”

“Sure,” I responded, and it sounded ’way different. None of that sounded
very real to me.

The Bump said, “That … is … _heavy_. Covers about all the philosophy
there is, doesn’t it?”

He gave her that surprised-pleased look at this like when he gulped the
glass of milk only it was eggnog. “Right!” he said, and went off to
peddle his papers.

“Bastard,” said the Bump. She mimicked him: “Right! … right, you
bubble-headed female, who’d ever think _you’d_ understand anything—any
of you.” She hit the top of her typewriter so hard it went ding. “How is
it we have a moon dome and a cure for nine kinds of cancer and we still
have to put up with male chauvinist piggery like that?”

“I guess because we still have papers and paper boys,” I said. “He bugs
me too.”

“Did he give you the money this month?”

“Yeah.”

“Damn.” She was genuinely disappointed. For reasons too complicated and
too trivial to explain, his office utilities were on our bill and he was
supposed to give us the cash every month. If he didn’t get around to it
the Bump would climb his back about it. In addition she never thought it
was enough. She suspected him of living in his office as well as working
in it. She would stop in the middle of some complicated wheelie-dealie
and demand to know if I smelled bacon cooking. Sometimes I thought I did
too, but I always said no. I didn’t give a damn about that or the
utility money either. She didn’t, I don’t think, not really, but somehow
or other she had to get one-up. What she really wanted was for me—me!—to
jimmy into his place when he wasn’t there and look for dirty dishes. Or
like the woman-immemorial: march right in to him and say.… None of which
I dare voice to her. One male chauvinist pig in her sights was enough.
The Bump exploding all over my office at me, I did not need. Given a
little slack (let her call me dummy once in a while if it did her good)
she was what’s called a valuable employee. “Back to work.”

“I was working.”

“When I walked in here you were gumming with Smiley about metaphysics.”
Smiley was not his name. He was the surliest and most ill-mannered man I
ever met, so behind his back we used to call him Smiley.

She gave me the exasperated look and started an album. The eight-foot
wide tank emitted two thumping discords and a shriek and exploded into a
mass of whirling colors which fuzzed and resolved themselves into the
Catalyst, which is my heaviest group and my biggest headache. Number
four on the charts, which is great. Number four for nine weeks now
without moving—that’s spooky. They blared and tinkled and whomped until
I put my hands over my ears. I don’t know anything about music, but I
know what I like. I also know that whether or not I like something has
nothing to do with whether I can sell it. That was a hard thing to learn
and the secret of my success. I’m the best woodstocker that ever was.
“What the hell is that?”

The Bump yanked out the holo-cube in mid-honk. The silence almost made
me bite my tongue. The Bump squinted at the label. “ ‘Metaphysical
Mope.’ ”

“Oh. So he came in while you were playing it and that started the
argument.”

“He says it’s Scriabin.”

“Let me work my own way through that. Archaic Moldavian slang meaning
both ‘scream’ and ‘scratch.’ He’s right.”

“No, dummy,” she said, and then, I think in spite of herself, laughed
and nodded. “I think you have a point there. Scriabin was a composer.”

“I know. But that’s not Scriabin, it’s pure Catalyst. Jomo Delahanty
writes everything for the group and he wrote that. Anyone who ever heard
the Cat and hears this new one would tell you that.”

“Right,” agreed the Bump—but ominously. “Just what the newsboy said.
They’re _all_ Scriabin.”

_“What!”_

“Except for ‘Moongut.’ ” (‘Moongut’ was Catalyst’s first million
seller.) “That was Dvorak.” She picked up a note from her desk. “Quartet
in D minor.” She was enjoying this. She has a very evil sense of humor.

I sat down mostly because I had to. “You don’t know what you’re saying.”

“Right. I didn’t say it—the newsboy did.”

As if on cue he kicked the door open and shoved something flat into my
hands. I said Hey! and he said Later and left. It all went just that
fast. I looked at the something flat. I hadn’t seen one in years. Not a
new one, anyway. I have eleven of them and they’re priceless. Audio
discs, twelve inches, 33 1/3 rpm. This one was monophonic. _“Mono!”_ I
must have shouted it. Now this I had never seen before, though I’d heard
of them.

“What is it?” the Bump demanded.

“Scriabin.” I got up and started back for my display. “Mono, by God.” My
display is my pride and joy. Among the plaques and trophies in gold
cubes are replicas of every kind of record player that ever was, from
Edison’s hand-cranked wax cylinder to the big eight-footer with its
holograph tank and octophonic surround. There’s a hand-wound clockwork
Victor acoustic with a horn like a lily-flower and a deadly looking
Atwater Kent with an S-shaped megaphone and fourteen knobs. I went to
the Magnavox. It used to have glass “tubes”—sort of electronic valves
with a hot filament, absolutely unobtainable now, so the amp was
solid-state, but otherwise it was perfect. I switched it on and put the
disk on the turntable and did the thing that made the stylus swing over
and lower itself to the spiral groove. Very quaint, very camp. It had a
rumble and a hum and a wow and a hiss, all at once, and the sound was
peculiarly flat, a single source split eight ways through my speakers.
It was a piano solo, it was called “Sonata Number Two,” and sure as hell
it was “Metaphysical Mope.”

“The dirty lying little grave-robber,” I said, meaning Delahanty. “Where
is he?”

The Bump knew who I meant. “Where you sent him, woodstocking at the
Groundhog Festival in Punxsutawney.”

“I’ll kill him.”

“Not while he’s in the top ten,” said the Bump reasonably. “Wait till
he’s off the charts.”

“Which will be in about forty-eight hours if this gets out.”

“Oh, I don’t know. Stealing is so common in this lousy business it’s
almost a virtue.”

“Not unless it’s public domain. It could get me into bad trouble.”

“Aristotle wrote a lot about ethics too,” said the Bump, “and I can’t
say for sure, but I don’t think he’d go along with stealing even from
public domain.”

“Aristotle never had to phase in with contracts and residuals and payola
and media seduction.”

“Well what are you going to do?” asked the Bump, which was the head-on
point which I was try to shout my way away from. What am I going to do.
This Scriabin operated a long time ago—“Find out how long ago was this
Scriabin.”—and maybe we’re home free with the public domain number.
Maybe it would even help, give us class. Did any group ever get hurt
stealing from Tchaikovsky? Chopin? Grieg? Leadbelly? “Maybe what we
should do is nothing. And nobody ever bothers.”

At which the Bump did a delicate muscular thing with the architecture of
her nostrils and snorted. With marvelous mimicry she unfolded an
imaginary copy of the _Daily New Downbeat_ (you could tell because the
_DNB_ has a funny way of folding page one) and read the imaginary
headline: “ ‘CAT CRIBS CLASSICS. Jomo Delahanty a JD? Woodstocker claims
ignorance of real music.’ Those are the headlines and subheads. Here’s
the body copy: ‘Woodstocker Sol U. Rock, whose real name is reputed to
be Edward Smith, conceded yesterday in the face of overwhelming evidence
that the works of Jomo Delahanty, gangling nexus of the Catalyst, are
lifted bodily from the century-old works of one Alexander N. Scriabin.
The woodstocker protested that the theft was done without his knowledge
and in the face of his complete innocence, or ignorance, of the nature
of classical music or indeed the nature of any music.’ ”

“Stop.” I said it straight, with a good hard thump, but she went right
on reading her imaginary paper. “Noted musicologist Harrisson Twixt,
contacted at his ranch in the Mojave, claims to have had in preparation
for a long time an exposé of the Delahanty fraud, and suggests that the
Catalyst has gone as high as four on the charts by Comrade Scriabin’s
excellence, and has failed to go any higher because of Delahanty’s
interference with the original.’ Sol, you’re interrupting.”

And I was. “I said _stop!_”

She didn’t like to be yelled at. “Stop exactly what?”

“Enjoying this, for one. And my name never was Edward Smith. And he was
never ‘comrade’ Scriabin, he did his thing before the revolution. And
Harry Twixt is a superpresh who wouldn’t hold still for rock music if
you strapped him to a board. Hey, you don’t think he really is preparing
a blast on this, do you?”

“No, but he would if it got around, and he’d say exactly the same thing
Smiley said.”

“Him again. You mean about getting to four and sticking there.”

“Right. He said pure Scriabin would send Catalyst right to the top.”

“What the hell does he know, a newsboy.”

“Yeah, what the hell does he know. Sol—what are you going to _do_?”

That again. I said, “If Delahanty’s done me that, and he did, and this
gets out like you say, and it will, I—I—” I sat down. “I don’t know what
the hell I’m going to do.”

With total injustice the Bump (who after all was intensely loyal) said:
“I know one damn newsboy ought to mind his own business.” With equal
injustice I agreed with her.

And you must not think that at this time the newsboy was any special
preoccupation of ours. For that matter neither was Delahanty or
Catalyst. We had lots of other troubles. Catalyst wasn’t by any means my
only account, and if you know anything at all about woodstocking you
know there’s a hell of a lot more to it than a stage and audio towers
set in some place they don’t belong, with upwards of a half-million
people making themselves locally unwelcome. It begins with things you
probably never thought about, like paid whispering campaigns and rumor,
and it goes on to advance men and publicity and made-news until it gets
to the hard chores of sugaring the heat (twice as bad if it’s
overseas)—transport, customs, language, terrain and always, weather.
Then there are the hitchhikers—legit ones like the record companies and
the parasite press, and the baddies who think how great it is to ship
dope and currency in instrument crates. As if that isn’t Station One in
any county or narc probe. And the groupies we always have with us. On
the surface we beat them back, but there have been times when the
performers have been so repulsive I’ve had to _hire_ groupies. And oh,
the scene, the scene. It’s going to happen to woodstocking like it did
to football, I swear, where the half-time shows got so big and glittery
they began to run them without a ball game. There’d been woodstocks on a
continent of rafts in the Gulf, and in the crater of a rumbling volcano.
(Hairy, that one.) A desert, a swamp (three deaths from moccasin bites,
that time) and once on four blocks of Second Avenue, with the audience
in all the windows and the stage on a temporary bridge on the 54th
floor. It cost a lot of money to buy four blocks of Second Avenue for
four days. But the scene, the scene … you had to have a scene. And the
more kooky and tilted the scenes got, the harder it was to find a new
one.

I got hung up one night and was working on ways and means and especially
ifs in a woodstock to compete with Oberammergau, right on the scene.
Anything in that much bad taste would be a big plus presswise, but it
generated angles that nobody had ever thought of before. I was thinking
of those angles—promotional, religious, political. And whether or not to
throw the best talent I had into it, to start arguments on taste, or the
worst, which would make a group expendable and very likely expended. And
how do you word a contract which lets you out clean if the group is
mobbed? And all like that, when someone bleeped the front door.

I complain a lot about working at night but actually I like it. No
calls, no visitors, and I can take my spats off. Also I can play
whatever I want on the equipment without worrying who might spread the
word that I was cornball or too far out or maybe planning to steal some
other woodstocker’s talent. It is amazing how few people passing by and
hearing sounds from a woodstocker’s office are capable of thinking just
maybe he could be playing something for his own personal kicks.

So when I get barged in on late at night I don’t like it much no matter
who, and I guess I showed it when I answered the bleep. It was the
newsboy. I opened the door and left it open and walked backed to where I
was working.

He came in and said, “Got any ice cubes?” And went over to the cooler. I
may have sort of waved my hand yes; I don’t know. Not that it would’ve
made any difference; I don’t think he looked my way. He was a big man,
maybe forty-five, with a sour face. “It’s flat,” he said.

“What’s flat?”

“The Liszt.”

I thought it sounded pretty good. Also I was annoyed by his not waiting
for my ok on the ice and, irrationally, by his having caught me
listening to “Les Preludes.” “The hell it is.”

He put down the ice cube tray and came back, shoving his way through the
gate into the inner office and walking back to my display wall, where my
antique Sony quadraphonic was playing. He put the back of his middle
fingernail against the tape where it passed between the feed wheel and
the heads, and pressed upwards. “Brake’s dragging,” he grunted. “Fix it
and the whole thing will come up in pitch almost a quarter tone.”

“Listen, that machine is—”

“That machine is going to stretch your tape, and it’ll be a long cold
summer before you find another like it.”

“What have you got, perfect pitch?”

“Yuh.” He went back to the refrigerator. “Can I take some coffee?”

I glanced up. He was already into my stash of plastic coffee packs, was
not waiting for an answer. His whole approach was to scrounge penny-ante
things in such a way as to make you a miser if you objected. “What are
you going to do about that grave robber?”

“What grave robber?”

“Jomo what’s-his-name.” (As if everybody in the world didn’t know what
his name was.) “The Scriabin.”

I hadn’t forgotten about it but I’d been trying. Everybody—well, the
Bump—kept asking me what I was going to do. I kept asking me what I was
going to do. So I got sore and said it was my business what I was going
to do.

“Okay,” he said mildly, and picked up his ice and his coffee—eleven
packs, would you believe?—and went to the door. “Do you know when
Scriabin was born?” He asked, and left without waiting for an answer.

Did I know when Scriabin was born. Did I care when Scriabin was born. I
went back to work on the Oberammergau, with a grumble-grumble going on
in the back of my head. I should tell that guy off. I should throw him
out. I should wait until he was out and burgle into his place and find
out if he really did fry bacon on my bill. I got madder and madder at
him for making me mad at me, and began to understand some of the Bump’s
tirades about him.

It was all of an hour and a half later that I let myself realize that
Scriabin and his date of birth were shoving themselves between me and
what I was trying to do. In exasperation I dialed the Library computer
and asked.

Christmas Day, 1871.

Big deal. I went back to work, accomplishing not very much except the
clear realization that it was too late and I was too tired and that
newsboy had cost me again. And eleven packs of coffee to boot. Cursing
him, I shut up shop and went home.

It takes me forty minutes to get home, so it was eighty minutes before I
got back to the office. I don’t think I have ever been so excited in all
my life. I started writing do-it memos to stack on the Bump’s desk,
placed orders, wrote queries, and kept the computer down at the Library
humming.

“Well, you’re up early!”

I looked up. It was the Bump, and around her was a blue haze from my
fatigue, and across her face were little moving speckles—the black spots
swimming in front of my eyes. And I felt just wonderful. “No, I’m up
late.”

“Oh my God.” I don’t know whether she said that because of the mountain
of paper in her do-it stack or because the door opened and in walked
Jomo Delahanty. “Well,” he said, “you’re up early.”

“I’m up late,” I said again. “Sit down and shut up, Jomo. I want to talk
to you. Bump, take a memo. To—”

“Well!” said the newsboy from the door. “You’re up early!” He put down
the paper and went out.

“No, I’m—Bump! Quit that giggling. And cancel our subscription to that
damned paper!”

“We don’t have a subscription to that damn paper. He just brings it. He
brings it whether I fight with him or not. I hate him a lot. He give you
the money this month?”

“Yes, I told you! Jomo—”

“Massacree at Punxsutawney,” said Jomo, and began punching the air and
snapping his fingers, punch, snap, punch, snap, which he always did when
he was talking to you. He never looked at you either, just off into the
middle distance, punch, snap, punch, snap. Pop stars. “We killed them
dead by the hundreds of thousands.” He wore a kilt with a codpiece.

“I know what you did at Punxsutawney. You barely scored enough to cover
the bribes, with enough left over to buy a peanut for the groundhog.”

“You always sweet talk me, Solly boy.” He closed his eyes, showed his
teeth, and went punch, snap.

The Bump said, “What are you going to do about—”

“Shut up, Bump. I got to have words with this, uh, talent. You know
where you are on the charts?”

“Four.” Punch, snap.

“And you know where you were last week? And the week before? And the
week before that?”

“That’s show biz.” Punch, snap.

“I’ll tell you what’s showbiz. It’s great to be in the top ten but four
is special. Up from four and you’re a winner. Down from four is _out_,
man. You don’t slide, you fall right off. Well maybe number eight, nine
for a week, but then goodbye.”

“I got a new cut that’ll—”

“You got ‘Metaphysical Mope’ that’ll keep you right where you’re at for
maybe two more weeks. The other thing special about number four is that
the longer you stay there the surer it is that you’ll fall right off. If
you even get to three for a week you might have a chance, but every time
you score that four after four, you’re closer to the final edge.”

“He’s right,” said the Bump, which is, I think, the first time she ever
said such a thing in my hearing.

Punch, snap, punch, snap. “Well don’t you fret Solly boy. I got a trick
up my sleeve, something new, something different. I got a whole new
sound, whole new trend.” Punch, snap, and the closed eyes and the teeth,
the bit that always made the split-tails scream. He opened his eyes and
looked right at me for a change. “And I am not just jammin’ a loose
riff. I hit that stride a while back and it paid off, and I never went
on with it. Now I will. Okay?”

“You mean you’re going to stop stealing from Scriabin and go back to
robbing Dvorak?”

No punch.

No snap.

From the corner of my eye I saw the Bump slowly, slowly sitting down. I
think she had to. Jomo Delahanty sprawled where he was, speared and
bleeding and glassy-eyed. Sometimes it’s a shame to catch a man so dead
to rights. Sometimes it does a lot more harm than good. You got to leave
the man a place to stand.

He said, “How did you know?”

“Did you take me for a musical ignoramus?”

“Yes.”

I heard suppressed laughter make a scratchy noise in the Bump’s sinuses.
I hoped it hurt.

“What you want me to do?” asked Jomo. (Jomo!)

“Go on doing what you’re doing,” I said. “It’s great. The only thing
wrong with the Scriabin you’ve been doing is Jomo Delahanty. Give us
less of that and more of the real thing. Of course, double the beat and
fuzz the sides, and fool around like that all you want, but keep the
Scriabin clean.”

“They’ll … find out. They’ll know!”

“Sure they’ll know.… When was Scriabin born?”

“Long time back.”

“Christmas 1871,” said the Bump, looking at my notes.

“Christmas, 1871. Next year, two hundred even. Right?”

Behind me I heard the Bump, in an awed whisper, begin reverently to
recite the names of the top deities from three religions. I said, “You
are going to ram hot clean Scriabin clear up to the top of the charts
for a whole year, and when the news leaks out it will be countered with
a prepared campaign and the biggest woodstock ever seen, for the
Scriabin Second Centenary, and the fans’ll be locked in, and the
snobs’ll love you for the greatest rediscovery since Mendelssohn plugged
J.S. Bach.”

“How did you know that story, Sol?” asked the Bump. “I took you for a
musical ig—”

“Shut up, Bump. Now you listen, Jomo. Scriabin wrote—hand me that note,
Bump—no, _that_ one.… Scriabin wrote five symphonies, more or less, ten
sonatas, and a whole bunch of orchestral poems and preludes. There ought
to be enough there for you to keep your sticky fingers busy for that
year. I want more Scriabin, less Delahanty, and lyrics.”

“Yuh, yuh, what?”

“Lyrics.”

“You mean words? _Words_, to neo-rock? Aw man, nobody writes words no
more, except folk, and I don’t do folk. Nobody’s wrote words for forty
years, man. I mean an antique dealer I may be, but camp I am not. They
used to do that, but more and more the music crowded in, and more and
more the words fuzzed down, and everybody likes it the way it is, you
listen and feel, man, and you don’t screw it up with ‘wha he say, wha he
say?’ ”

“You trust this nose, and Jomo, and do like I said.”

Jomo stirred himself up from three-quarters horizontal to a forty-degree
list, which was his code for standing up for his rights. “And if I
don’t?”

“Think about it,” I said. I let him think about it for a minute. I let
him think about the clause in his contract which called for original
compositions, and I let him think about the public announcement that
he’d stolen everything he ever wrote. I could see him thinking about
“the biggest woodstock ever seen,” too. All this thinking got kind of
heavy and he slowly slumped under the weight until he was backed to
supine. And I had him.

“But I can’t write lyrics,” he moaned. (“Either,” I heard the Bump
murmur.) And he had me.

There was a painful silence for a while and then Jomo stirred. He sat up
and punched a couple of times, though he couldn’t cheer himself up
enough to snap. “I guess you get words the same way you get music,” he
said.

I shared a sick look with the Bump and then told Jomo to go round up the
group. “I’ll release ‘Metaphysical Mope,’ ” I said, “and by this time
tomorrow I want a call from you telling me you cut tracks on some new
Scriabin—your choice—and a draft of some lyrics.”

“Ain’t going to like this,” said Jomo, getting up. “I ain’t, they ain’t,
and them out there neither.” He left.

“It doesn’t scan and it doesn’t parse, but it do communicate,” the Bump
observed, and “Sometimes you do genius things, Sol.”

“Well, thanks.”

“Statistical necessity,” said my valued employee. “You do so many
things, so sooner or later—”

“Soon as you get to work.” I pointed at her do-it stack, wondering when
I could get a compliment without a sting in its tail.

The Bump had a hell of a fight with the newsboy. I concede that I got
the story from her, and you might think it is slanted her way, and it
probably was—but not much. Though she has an ego the size of Mount
Washington, the Bump has honesty like the Alps.



“I LOVE MAPLE WALNUT”


Ejler Edgar Aylmer (nobody has a name like Ejler Edgar Aylmer, not any
more) once showed me a computerized butler he invented. I’d visited his
basement workshop while he was having his lunch, and he said, “I want
some mustard.” Before I could finish saying, “Sure, where …” the far
wall made a noise like hawking in the antriums, and a great long
pantograph sort of thing came whizzing across the room and smacked a jar
of chilled Dijon into his open palm, retracting into the wall with a
crisp ptui.

“What was that, Ejler Edgar?”

“Butler,” said the inventor. “Of course, that’s an understatement. I’m
not about to tell you its real name. I told somebody else the other day,
and the consequences were not—ah …”

“You can tell me.”

“Well then, just between you and me and the far wall, I call it Cupid.”

“An acronym.”

“Not an acronym. Cupid is Cupid because nobody really understands how he
works. Also, Cupid always did have a way of giving people what they
deserved when what they asked for was their heart’s desire. Also there
was always something cold-blooded about Cupid with his blindfold and his
random shots. Cupid—this one here—is after all a computer, recording all
available data, sieving it through the command, and dropping the result
out of the chute—in this case, fulfilling the demand.”

“It can give you anything? _Anything?_”

“Certainly. Doesn’t everybody believe that of Cupid? You get what you
want, based on every scrap of data that Cupid can discover about you. No
matter what.” And he made a peculiar laugh.

“Ejler Edgar, you better tell me why you made that peculiar laugh. I
won’t tell as long as we both shall live.”

And I think all along he really wanted to tell me. “It was that other
idiot” (I think that was how he phrased it) “who used to come barging in
here at lunchtime. Dendium, his name was, Potiphar Ungwall Dendium, a
lubricious type with a pornographic wink and a chuckle out of his right
molars. Used to gobble his lunch at Greasy’s and get his dessert to
go—gooey puddings and sloppy sundaes, leave the empty containers around
the basement for me to clean up. Wormed the name Cupid out of me, found
out Cupid could deliver anything—_anything_. Challenged me to prove it.
So I said, ‘Go ahead, ask.’ So he said, ‘You know what I want, Cupid.
and I want it at home in bed waiting for me.’ He launched one of those
winks, and I swear the man’s eyelashes smelled of musk.

“Back he comes the next day, really, doesn’t begin to be lunchtime,
screaming at me. Called me a dammit. ‘Dammit,’ he screams, ‘frigidity I
can deal with, but this is ridiculous. You and your dammit dammit butler
…’ ”

“Dammit?”

“You are very young,” said Ejler Edgar gently. “I am substituting. ‘Your
dammit butler put me to bed with an ice cream cone!’ Then he called me a
dammit and stormed out.”

“But why? I mean, _why?_”

“Because Cupid can only act on the data he gets. Maybe that’s what the
blindfold means. And because the word love is so rich in meanings and so
poor in distinctions between those meanings, Cupid gave him love as he
himself defined it, one of the times he was here.”

“Defined it how?”

“I won’t tell you,” said Ejler Edgar. I guess I looked pretty stricken
because he said, “but I’ll write it.”

“Write it where?”

“Why, up there at the top of your story,” said Ejler Edgar Aylmer, may
he rest easy wherever he may be.



BLUE BUTTER


Not having heard anything in so long, I went over to his lab and banged:
_bip-bip. bam bam_. “Hey, come in,” came Stromberg’s voice, and it
called my name.

Thirty-eight years I’ve known Stromberg, and that instant recognition of
my knock, that immediate _Hey, come in!_ are things I am very, very
proud of. I never knew how I earned them. I learned from a third party
one time that he liked having me around because he could talk with me
about anything, anything at all, all the things that kept that great big
brain of his seething along the way it did: physics, chemistry, art,
music, electronics, poetry, food, love, politics, philosophy, humor. The
third party had it, wrong. He could talk to me about things. Not with.
Nobody could talk with him about those things. Not all those things.

So in I came and through the dark front office to the lab with its rows
of Miller flasks, with the hoods, the beautiful bewilder of crystal
plumbing, the computer array with its visual mutter of indicator lights
and readouts, red and orange and off-white to green, the huge pegboard
over the electronics bench with its racks of tools and shiny black boxes
and bundles of test leads like parades of trained baby snakes with
chromium jaws. Through an inner door I could see something of the
chemistry and bio lab, where, if the readouts muttered in lights, the
gleam of glass was a complex whisper. Around the back wall, where I
could not now see it, I knew there were cages and surgical instruments,
a scrubbing sink with treadle-controlled valves, a stainless steel vet’s
examining table, microscopes, microtomes, two centrifuges, a sterilizer
and a sink. Two entire walls, right to the ceiling, were glass-fronted
cabinets of chemicals. Through a further door was, I knew, a library
with its own computer terminal for instant retrieval of book locations
and to tap into outside sources.

The main laboratory, where I stood just inside, was lit only by a wash
of yellow light from the open door of the little room in which Stromberg
kept nothing but his cot and his coffee, and a dazzling cone of
“daylight” fluorescence from a point in the ceiling. On a low stool in
the center of this disc of light sat Stromberg, half dressed—the top
half—with his legs spraddled out due south and due west respectively,
anointing his pubic area heavily with a thick blue-gray paste. He
flashed me a smile, said “Nothing alarming,” and went on with his work.

I had nothing to say and so said it while he finished what he was doing.
He then wiped his fingers with a succession of tissues, replaced the
cover on the jar of paste, placed a series of gauze pads on the affected
area, where they stuck enthusiastically, and rose. I followed him into
the cot-and-coffee room. “I needn’t have said that,” Stromberg grinned,
“about being alarmed. Not to you. You have that virtue—did anyone ever
tell you? You seem to be completely accepting. You’re not judgmental.
You don’t apply moral and social yardsticks to what people do. You just
take it in and you wait. That’s kind of nice.” He went into the little
bathroom in the corner and washed his hands busily, like a surgeon.
“Make coffee.”

It was made. I fixed mine, honey and milk, and his, black, in big
ceramic cups. I could have corrected his accolade. I have as many
prejudices, make as many moral evaluations as the next man, and more
than some. What Stromberg was not in a position to know was that I did
not, would not, could not apply any of them to him, and never had. Just
for an immediate example, when he came out of the bathroom wearing only
a polo shirt, with his masculine apostrophe protruding from a nest of
stuck-on white gauze slowly staining grey, it could not be called
ludicrous. Stromberg was never ludicrous. Not to me.

He slid a drawer out of the wall and removed a pair of white boxer
shorts and a disposable white coverall. He put them on and slid his feet
into throwaway slippers, took from another drawer a large plastic bag,
banged it open, and handed it to me. He stripped the cot completely,
rolling up the foam mattress, sheets and blanket, and while I held the
bag open, manhandled the whole bundle inside. He twisted the top closed,
padded out to the office, and came back with a big bright tag reading
CONTAMINATED. “Go wash your hands,” he said, dragging the bag off toward
the outer door. “Nothing lethal,” he reassured me as I went into the
bathroom.

In the bathroom were graffiti. Not many.

NOTHING IS ALWAYS ABSOLUTELY SO.

“E=MC² MAY AFTER ALL BE A LOCAL PHENOMENON.”

—ALBERT EINSTEIN

“ANY ANSWER IS NOT NECESSARILY THE ONLY ANSWER.”

—CHARLES FORT

—and, surprisingly

YOU BLOW MY MIND

AND

I’LL SUCK YOURS

“Joey broke his thumb,” I said, coming out of the bathroom.

“Broke? How? When? On what? Is it—”

I put out my hands placatingly. Stromberg can talk at you sometimes like
over a gunsight. “Clean break, simple fracture, three weeks ago, no
complications. Stuck his thumb through the spokes of the pulley on his
gemstone tumbler.”

“Why isn’t there a guard on it?”

“There is a guard on it. He opened it up to show another kid why there
was a guard on it.”

Tension flowed out of his shoulders and neck and tugged at the corners
of his mouth as it went away. He held up his left hand, wiggled the
little finger. Flexed, it was a little out of line at the second joint.
Never noticed that before. “Did the exact same thing when I was his
age,” he said. “How about that.… How’s Curie?”

“Perfect. Just beginning to find out that being a girl’s not the same as
being a kid.”

He liked that. I’d known he would. He twinkled at me and gently gibed,
“Incipient chauvinism?”

“Mine, not hers. Never hers.”

We went into the main lab where he picked up the ointment and tissues he
had left on the floor by the stool. Tidy man. He asked it, finally; he
had to:

“Mitty?”

“Just fine. Just fine. Took the kids to Arrowhead for a week. Got a new
green cape.”

“Look, is she happy?”

I had to wait a bit to answer that. “Happier,” I said carefully. “That
figures.” He nodded, and then nodded again. “No place to go but up.
I—I’ll drop around soon, see them.”

“Good idea.”

He shot me a special look of his. It makes you blink when he does that.
Lasers don’t need gunsights. “You see them a lot.”

“Mm.” Almost every day, a lot of nights, but there was no need to say
it.

“That’s good.” He was still a moment, then made a characteristic gesture
of his, raising his hands, letting them fall to slap his thighs. Change
of subject. He went to the office doorway and hit the wall-switches.
Hooded lights over the far benches winked on, and the aching cone from
the ceiling went out. It was a lot pleasanter that way.

“Everything’s a part of everything anyway,” he said.

“Who said that?” For I knew it was a quote.

“The singer Donovan. Also the _I Ching_, the joss sticks, divination by
sheep’s guts, and me.”

“Okay.” Then I waited.

“ ‘To measure a circle, begin anywhere.’ ”

I knew who that was. That was Charles Fort.

He finally found a place to begin. And he was right; he could have begun
anywhere. I knew this man, I’d been with him in this mood before. It
drove some people past all patience, the way he moved from one thing to
another, however authoritatively; they wanted a neat title for it all,
like the label on a jar of ointment, letting you know ahead of time what
was inside what it was made of, what it was for. With Stromberg, you had
to wait while he made a brick, set it aside, wait while he cut a beam,
set it aside, wait while he forged nails and roofing tar and conduit and
sash. When he was done it would be a structure; you could trust him for
that.

“Some people,” he said, “are gifted—maybe it’s ‘afflicted’ with a
different time scale from other people. They don’t think in biographical
time—I mean, my era, things since I was born, or in historical time, the
miserable tick of time—” he snapped his fingers “—since we began to
write our adventures and our lies about our adventures. They think in
geological time, in astronomical time, in cosmological time. I’m talking
about the idiots who involve themselves in science fiction, reading it,
writing it. Some scientists. Some philosophers.”

“Some mystics.” I shouldn’t have interrupted. I do know better. But he
almost conceded the point.

“Maybe so. Maybe, though I tend to think that a lot of them, and a lot
of composers and artists and the more broad-spectrum theologians, take
off at right angles to what I see as the linearity of things, the
progress from cause to effect. I dunno. Maybe that gives them a
perspective as important as, cosmological-time thinking. I dunno. I
dunno. They’re not mutually exclusive. Room for everyone. It’s a ‘big
universe.’ ”

We sat down. Stromberg literally, one hunker at a time, sat on his
hands. “Trying like hell not to scratch,” he explained. “Anyway, people
with a mental set like that are regarded as something less than human.
Cold. Uncaring, lacking in something … it isn’t like that. It isn’t.
It’s just that marriage contracts and chivalry and whether or not you
report to church or carry the clan bone through your nose, these things
can’t weigh too heavily in the presence of continental drift and the
birth and death of stars. You can love her and rub her feet and try to
get tickets for the opening, to make her happy, but what do you do with
the recognition that she, and you, and all your works and thoughts, are
trivialities? Especially when you can’t say it to her. Never. Never.”

“Oh.”

He shot me a look. “I think I heard a light go on.”

“You did. I never really knew before. More_—she_ never knew, doesn’t
know. She thinks she failed you in some way. She takes it hard, the
papers: NOBEL LAUREATE AT RACE TRACK. Dr. Stromberg seen in Hollywood in
the company of. Dr. Stromberg in temporary custody after waterfront
brawl. She thinks she did all that, some way.”

“Well, she didn’t.” He waved his hand at the computer wall. “That did.
The big extrapolation. Hey, I held your head through something once.
Your kid sister.”

I nodded. It still knotted my stomach. “Ran through a plate-glass door.
Face, hands, arms, legs. Squirting twenty jets of blood.”

“Horrible,” he agreed. “But after the initial emergency was over and
they had her put together again and on the way back, what was driving
you right off the track?”

I remembered. “ ‘What did she do to deserve this?’ ”

“Right. And I was able to tell you that ‘right’ and ‘wrong’ and
‘deserve’ belong to some other scale, some other country, language, some
other set than the cause-and-effect sequentiality that resulted in all
that virgin’s blood.”

“It helped.”

“Sure it did. Unfortunately, there’s no way to pour the same balm on my
wife without insulting her.”

I said, very carefully, “It was very sudden. One day, a set-in-his ways
family man. The next, lawyers’ and bankers’ letters, a huge settlement,
and the day after, the headlines begin. It’s too easy to assign it to
some middle-aged itch, the pursuit of vanishing youth. Something
happened.”

He nodded, and rapped his head, replacing the hand under his right
buttock. “The whole thing was there, had been for a long time. But on
that day the lights went on for _me_.” Again he nodded at the computers.

I just waited until he came to some internal decision and began to
speak. “Listen:

_She wounds you, as a rose will wound, Not always, as expected, with its
thorn. A rose will always wound you with its rose_.

“Gooseflesh.”

“Gooseflesh. Right. Harry Martinson, a Swede wrote it. Gooseflesh for
Bach’s “Passacaglia and Fugue in C Minor,” for the last movement of
_Beethoven’s 9th_, for a sailplane, for Nureyev, for Gagarin who, said,
“I am an eagle.” Gooseflesh for the groining of a Gothic cathedral and
for Ellington and for Dylan Thomas. Gooseflesh, if you like, for _pons
asinorum_ and the little fingernail of your first child. But by what
towering arrogance do we attach any importance or permanence, to any of
these things? Importance to us, whose things they are, of course
naturally. But to a _louse?_ What does human transcendence have to do
with a louse, except that it might make a single human sit a little
stiller to be bitten?

“And by what towering conceit do we assume that a louse has not its own
Shakespeares and Mozarts? No one ever thought of that—not ever. We will
tolerate a louse by not thinking about it, sometimes by not believing it
exists, but when we become aware, we smother it with blue butter, never
dreaming or caring that all the lice might be sharing the equivalent, to
lice, of ‘A rose-red city, half as old as time.’ ”

He leaned forward and spoke with a terrible intensity. “All right, I’ll
tell you what I saw when the lights went on, when the computer read me
out the final extrapolation. We are all lice on the earth, life living
off life, down to the bacteria which live off the substance of the earth
itself. And up to now the earth hasn’t known nor cared. Now it knows,
now it cares. Not as a conscious entity, of course; I’m not giving you
the _When the Earth Screamed_ kind of poppycock. Linear causation: the
rare accident of our atmosphere and its special orchestration of
components produced life, and now life has made itself manifest enough
to upset the balance.”

“Ecologically—” I began to say.

“Damn it, I’m not giving you more of that popular and fashionable drone
about ecology and conservation. There is no conservation that will do
any good; we’re on the slide. The death of the oceans and the loss of a
breathable atmosphere are not the end of the world—the world, per se, is
not going to end, not for billions of years more.

“Earth has always, in its numb passive way, fought us back. The struggle
for existence, for life, has always been a struggle because by its
nature earth didn’t want us. Like us with the lice, we can live with
them until we itch. Well, we’ve itched the earth and when we didn’t
respond to a scratch or two, to a plague or a quake, then time came for
the blue butter.

“We’re going back now, all the way to methane and ammonia, hydrogen
sulfide, water vapor and hydrogen for an atmosphere, back to the
fifty-year rains and a land unprotected by an ozone layer. It won’t be
exactly the primordial atmosphere, but something very like it, at least
as far as terrestrial life is concerned. It won’t be a triviality like
another Ice Age. It’ll be clear back to before-the-beginning.

“_It will be_. I am not fantasizing, I am not guessing. It will be so.

“So learning that, I looked at myself—fifty-one years old, faithful,
reliable, a good credit risk. Never drank, fought, gambled, picked up a
woman at a bar, never skated, skied, never ate haggis or kous-kous. So
now I am going to live till I die, I am going to feel, I am going to be.
I have money and so far, my health, and I am by God going to use them!”

For some time I couldn’t speak. When I could, I nodded at the computers
and asked, “Then there’s really no hope?”

He laughed out loud. “Hope? Of course there’s hope! By its very nature,
Earth is doomed to have parasites!” He freed one hand and patted his
crotch. “During that deluge of mercurial ointment—an old-fashioned
remedy but a good one—among the death-cries of the crab civilization I
heard the voice of one old louse-philosopher, who said, ‘Have hope, my
friends, have hope, he is but preparing the ground for another dose of
crabs.’ I’m quite certain that he was right, and I do hope for the
future of lousedom that the new clean environment produces a crab that
does not itch.”

I got up then and left, and went to find Mrs. Stromberg and, if I could,
tell her why.



THE SINGSONG OF CECILY SNOW


“Mesmer-Eyes” he called her in the moonlight; in the meantime he was
walking with her westerly to her inner wailing wall. A gross, uncaring
bastard was this Bulbul Byo, blessed with silver speech and graceful
gait and the manners of a tutor to the tutors of a household royal. His
score so far was 66 successful satisfactory seductions, 37 shattered
lives, six suicides, and fourteen thousand nights of bitter tears. His
road ahead was paved with promises; behind him he left loneliness and
puzzlement and greying disappointment—seldom anger, never vengeance.
“Mesmer-Eyes,” he whispered, “you can drain me with a glance, I am
weakened by your touch, I have no defense if you command me.”
Watchfully, he spoke to her, proclaiming weakness as she weakened,
acting melted as he touched her, humbled as he humbled her—his special
trick, this artful knack of taking on himself the outward signs of this
or that effect that he evoked in her. To make a woman want him he would
want her with his words and hands; to make her cry, he cried; to make
her yield, he said, “I yield.”

It worked. It always worked.

The target tonight was young Cecily—sunny and svelte and a cynosure,
making the marketplace more than a mall for mere merchandise. Moonmarket
Village (not really its name, but known so because of the region’s
tradition of holding its market day, sun-up to midnight each
full-of-the-moon) lay in the lake country east of the Wamberly Waters.
Who is to say that the Moonmarket merriment, the sweet, mellow madness
of Moonmarket Day, was caused by the magic of full-of-the-moon, or
simply to celebrate its high soaring silver? Nobody questioned it,
nobody wondered why rain never fell on the laughter and lanterns of
Moonmarket, nor why the wind whispered then, sweeping sweet smoke from
the barbecue stalls and fanning the flower carts, caring for colorful
kites and delaying the dancing of dust till the following day. Likewise
the matter of Cecily, golden and swift, her laughter a spatter of
birdsong, her adroitness in helping with tent pegs or tea baskets, her
instant and total attention to troubles and children; why no one
wondered where Cecily went when the market was over, nor how many
markets, for how many moons, was Cecily central to Moonmarket time. She
was, that is all, that is it; and a far greater mystery, greater than
moons or a biddable wind, was that nobody wondered, nobody questioned,
nobody traced the incredible Cecily Snow.

Bulbul Byo in a dusty cloak, with a hunting set to his wide-spaced eyes
and plumes to sweep from his glossy head and a twist of glands where his
heart should be and a tidal voice which could drown girls’ doubts, swung
down from the hills to the marketplace when the moon was full and the
late sun paused on the wooded crests. The village, framed by its
yielding fields with its outer border of wilderness and the distant lake
with its green and blue and its scarf of orange from the setting sun,
and the call of hucksters and the fiddles’ cry were enough to halt any
normal soul for a draught of joy. Bulbul’s care was for none of this,
for he saw the sun on long black hair and the swirl of skirts and
slender arms, and the fit of bodices that curved his hands; and his
glands beat strong and his pointed tongue flicked the pointed tip of his
upper lip and he took a step and he froze.

For then he saw Cecily, Cecily Snow, flickering down and across the
invisible lines that the dance-caller wove on the Moonmarket green,
tilting to this man and whirling with that, and allemande left, and
now-swing-your-own. Bulbul, a moment ago, had the choice of a hundred
and looked to the pleasure of choosing; but one glimpse of Cecily
settled the matter. One deep breath through wide flared nostrils, legs
come alive again, eyes blurring slightly through a mist of lust, Bulbul
strode to the village street and along to the green and around to the
place with the music played. And he waited.

And the music bleated and bubbled and came to a halt, and Cecily spun
gasping and smiling away from the dancers as the sets turned turmoil,
and found herself caught by the elbow and speared by the gaze of the man
in the cloak, who swept down his plumes and announced that he found her
at last.

“I do not know you, sir,” she said, “and I am not lost.”

“I am Bulbul Byo.” His throaty voice seemed aimed at the pores rather
than the ears; it soaked the skin entire, to its most intimate reaches.
“I came over the mountains and across the moors, seeing the loom of a
light like that of the unrisen moon, and thirsting to know its source;
and it led me to you. Now you know me and how I came to be here.”

“But not why,” she responded.

“To give you gifts,” he answered immediately, and gave her a little gold
locket he acquired two towns ago by saying to a woman that he did not
want it. He had given it away one town ago, and had gotten it back by
saying how he admired any lady who could treasure memory more than a
material thing. She took it and cupped it in one hand while the fingers
of the other drifted over its small bright surface looking not at it,
but at him. He felt a twinge of alarm, but kept it out of his voice.
“What are you doing?” he asked, surprising himself.

“Looking at you,” she replied.

“I mean, with the locket.”

“Looking at you,” she said; and at that, he should have known, but he
did not. She asked him then what other gifts he had in mind, which was
what he wanted to hear. He bowed slightly and offered his arm, which she
took, and they toured the market, where he bought her a sausage and a
cider.

“And now I have a thing unique and precious for you,” he said, and he
said it leaning forward, taking her shoulders, placing his mouth by her
neck, warming it, putting his words up under the fall of her hair. “But
I have it hidden yonder, and we shall have to walk.”

“Yonder? To the west? But there is nothing there but the wood, and
Wamberly Waters.”

“But there is. Come. We have the moon to help us.”

“Yes,” she said. “Indeed the moon will help us.” Arm in arm they walked
away westerly, whether or not to her wailing wall he could not care, and
she simply did not. “Tell me: what are you?” And he answered her easily:
traveler, trader, tutor, teller of tales; cavalier, courtier, captain of
calvary, artist and artisan, poet-philosopher. “My,” she said. “My!”

And into the fringes, moon-flecked and bright, of Wamberly Wood, and
into the thickening growth with more shadows than light, and into the
heart of the dark of the woodland they walked, when he sighed and they
stopped.

“What is it?”

“Forgive me; you’ve worked at the market all day, you were dancing for
half of the night, you are weary. I know by my own weariness, pressing
toward you day after day, and you must forgive me.” He opened the clasp
of his cloak and spread it on the moss and sank down on it, holding out
his hands. “I must rest, and so must you.”

“Perhaps I must,” said Cecily. “You’ve a weary-making way of saying
_weary_,” and she took his hands and nestled them beside him.

“The dark has not brought cool,” he said weakly. “I find it hard to
breathe,” and he unhooked the loops of his silken shirt.

“I, too, find it difficult.…” she whispered.

“I can barely move, but I shall help you,” and he unlaced her bodice.
She made no move to stop him. But as each lace was loosed, she murmured
a thing he had told her about himself: traveler, trader, tutor, teller
of tales; cavalier, courtier, captain of cavalry, artist and artisan,
poet-philosopher; and as the last lace fell away, she asked him, “Are
you also a liar?”

“Certainly not!” he cried, startled. “I speak only the truth!”

“Then sobeit,” she said; and, reaching into a stray thread of moonlight,
she filled her cupped hands with it like a fluid, and poured it over his
head.

For the second time he demanded, “What are you doing?” and she answered,
“Making of you a teller of truth.”

“I have told you the truth!” he protested. “I have sought you, I have
found you, I have become your servant and your slave!”

“Precisely,” said Cecily. “Know then that I am the Moon Witch of the
market village, and that the likes of what you were are not tolerated,
and what you now are can be useful; for now, anything you say will then
become the truth, since getting you to tell the truth in any other way
is beyond your ability or mine.”

“I will never leave you!” he cried.

“Oh damn,” said Cecily, “I do wish you hadn’t said that. Let me think a
minute.”

He waited slavishly for a moment and then she rose and held out her
hand. “Come with me.” And she led him through the wood to the shore of
the Wamberly Waters.

Moored there was a little boat. She ordered him into it and, opening the
little gold locket, she handed it to him, saying, “Your first condition
is that of my servant and my slave, and as such you must finish the task
I set you before you begin to be my constant companion. Therefore, I
order you to take this locket as your spoon and with it lift all of the
water from one side of the boat and put it all on the other side.” So
saying she bent and took the prow of the boat and mightily launched it
far out into the Wamberly Waters; then turned and walked into the wood,
lacing up her bodice and thinking good thoughts.

And so it is, if you ever cross the mountains and the rich fields of the
lake country, and at the full of the moon, come upon a village with a
Moonmarket, and go on through the forest to the lake shore, you will see
an old, old man in a boat, dipping and spilling, dipping and spilling,
while back in the village the dancers dance and the hawkers cry their
wares, and central to it all is the beautiful Cecily Snow. None of which
is a mystery, not when compared to the mystery that nobody ever
questions, nobody ever wonders, about Cecily, Cecily, Cecily Snow.



HARRY’S NOTE


The most exciting thing that ever happened to Harry (aside from
rheumatic fever and Susan) was the evening he spent with Timothy Leary.
After that—well, you’ll judge for yourself, but before, things had been
pretty quiet for Harry.

Dr. Leary came swinging into Woodstock, New York, bringing with him two
younger men, Metzner and Alpert, with shiny shoes, pants with creases,
and sharing a professorial, rather humorless air. They reminded Harry of
divinity students, senior grade: earnest, intense, illuminated. But
Leary, the leonine head just grizzling, straight-spined, quick-minded,
with his charisma and his resonant voice; Leary was something else
again.

He used words like “psychotomimetic” and a brand-new one, “psychedelic,”
and fielded questions like “If I knocked and the door was opened by a
man who had taken LSD, what would you look like?” and “Is it addictive?”
openly and immediately, all of which interested Harry quite a lot, but
it wasn’t until afterward, at the Café Espresso across the street, that
Harry achieved that highest-yet peak of excitement.

Over cappuccino, Dr. Leary held forth about mutations. “There are three
kinds of mutations,” said Leary. “Lethal ones, and you can mostly forget
about them. They cause stillbirths, and when they don’t, the young
seldom survive, and when they do, they seldom reproduce—they’re mules,
they just don’t live long enough to mate. Then there is the beneficial
mutation—say in a herd animal, when one is born with longer and stronger
hind legs. This one gets away from the predators better than any of the
others, and passes the strain on. The descendants thrive, and in a few,
or a few dozen generations, you’ll find a whole herd with the new legs.

“But there’s a third kind of mutation. It’s the one that just means
nothing—nothing at all. Suppose, in our herd animal, one is born with
mottled skin—black and pink, when all-pink has been the rule. This
coloration is under the hair, invisible unless you bring a razor and
shaving cream on your safari, and it doesn’t make any difference. It
doesn’t affect speed or strength or diet or anything else; there’s no
selective breeding for it because there just isn’t anything to select.
Well, in three generations, or three hundred, or three thousand—a very
short time, as such things go—the mottled characteristic will dilute and
die out, and, in all probability, never appear again. Why should it?

“All right,” he went on, “all the evidence is that the new brain, the
grey brain with its temporal lobes, was an explosive mutation and in
terms of the species it was a beneficial one. Humanity isn’t the first
animal to perform concerted actions, or to build elaborate structures,
or to use tools; it’s a matter of degree. Mankind was able to do these
things better, that’s all—a great deal better, and more of ’em. It
wasn’t the first to achieve communication with its own kind, either, but
again, it did it better than any competitor, and did it with a very
large plus: the ability to transmit knowledge not only to
contemporaries, but down through the generations. I mean, each tribe
didn’t have to discover fire over and over again, or the arch, or the
wheel, or Einstein’s general field theory. The height of knowledge we
have now reached (whatever _that_ is) we reached by standing on the
shoulders of those who gone before us, and who were able to communicate
it to us.”

Harry pointed to Leary’s empty cup, Leary nodded that big fine head,
Harry beckoned the waiter and pointed again, all very swift and
efficient, without Dr. Leary’s having to break his conversational
stride. It pleased Harry. Communication. Oh indeed, humanity has come a
long way.

“Beneficial mutation, right?” Leary demanded, and immediately, “Wrong!
Wrong, because every single one of those survival, progressive miracles
can be performed with only a fraction of the brain! Will you take my
word for that, or you want the documentation? Because believe me friend,
I have it: case histories of ninety percent recovery of function in
people with half their brains removed, papers on stereotaxia—electrical
stimulation of discrete parts of both the forebrain and the old, old
white brain under it, and documentation coming in daily in dozen lots of
psychedelic experience … but I covered that in my lecture, and you don’t
want to hear all that over again. No—I’m here to tell you that the
explosive mutation produced more than the capabilities we are so proud
of—much more. I don’t know how many times it has been said, by how many
people, that we only use a fraction of the forebrain; some say a tenth,
some say a third, some say two thirds, but I’m not going to get mired in
argument over percentages. I’m simply stating a well-known and proven
fact in biology: that if a living thing, plant or animal, has a limb or
organ tied off or immobilized, that limb or organ, be it leaf or thyroid
or good right arm is going to atrophy, drop off, die and rot, or what
have you. And the same thing happens on a larger scale, in the case of
that Class Three mutation is initially neither lethal nor beneficial.”

With tremendous slow emphasis, drawing all of that charisma into a tight
beam and aiming it into Harry’s eyes, he said, “Unless we discover the
function of that unused portion of the brain, then, just like the
mottling of the skin under the hair of the animal I mentioned, that part
of the brain will atrophy, wither away, dilute, disappear in thirty,
three hundred, three thousand generations—a tick of time in the history
of the species—never to be seen again in all the universe. Never!” And
he struck the table so hard that the sugar bowl jumped, and so did
Harry, and the waiter was afraid for a moment to put down the
cappuccino. “Find it, use it,” said Leary. “Use it or lose it. Use it or
lose it.” Harry thought he had tears in his eyes. He couldn’t know, for
the tears in his own.

It was the saddest story ever heard. The towering, monumental,
mountainous sadness of the concept—humanity having had, and having lost
this unknown potential, while keeping, while building on, the part of
itself it had already used—it was more than Harry could bear. It was
infinitely more tragic than the idea of the total death of humanity.
And—what would a future humanity be like, without that mysterious
potentiality? Would it go on building bigger skyscrapers, bombs,
frustrations and alienations? Would it become cookie-cutter repetitive,
with nothing left of its deepest humanness but flickering urges and
unidentifiable images? Who could know, without knowing the nature of the
thing that was lost?

He never could remember the rest of the evening; he never really tried,
though because of it he understood far better than the general public
what it was that drove Timothy Leary to do what he did, to become famous
and then infamous and then well on the road to fame again; and he
understood that it was the same thing that drove Metzner to seek his
measure of the problem his own way, and Alpert, who became Baba Ram
Dass, in yet another. But this was not their story.

The reason that this encounter had such an impact on Harry is that he
was, by some quirk of nature, a sadness freak—a collector of sadnesses.
Like the intergenerational growth of information, Harry’s sadnesses
stood on the shoulders of sadnesses gone by. When the guys got together
in college to slurp beer and tell dirty stories all night, Harry never
told dirty stories, he told sad stories, like the one about the man
making love to his wife who went on and on for an hour and a quarter
before he was finished, and his wife said, “Gosh, honey, what took you
so long?” And he answered, “Well, I couldn’t think of anybody.”

And the one he picked up in England, about the cheery warm pub, and a
thin little girl came in and out of the freezing fog, all big eyes and
little frayed coat. She sidles round to the bar and the cheery warm
bartender says, “Wot’ll you ’ave?” and she says, “ ’Ow much is arf-pint
o’ bitter?” and he says, “Tuppence,” and she says “Orl roight,” and he
fills this little bitty glass while she dumps her purse on the bar. She
starts to pick up the glass and he grabs a wrist like a chicken-foot and
presses it back down. “Wite a minute, ’old on there,” he says, “Yon’s a
penny and a button.” She puts her knuckles to her mouth and her eyes got
bigger than ever. “Ow,” she says, “Oi’ve been ’ad fer a button!”

A few like that and the guys would throw empty beer cans at Harry and
tell him to go home.

Harry cherished the true story of Humboldt and the parrot. Humboldt was
the 19th century German explorer for whom the Humboldt Currents are
named, and Humboldt County in California. Deep in the rainforest in
Brazil he encountered an Indian tribe; and in a village they had a
talking parrot. But this parrot did not speak the language of this
tribe; it came from another tribe, even deeper into the Matto Grosso,
and this second tribe was extinct. This parrot was the only living thing
on earth that spoke the language of that dead tribe; and it was only a
parrot.

This was the shining central jewel in Harry’s sadness collection until
that night at the Espresso. Though he never remembered the rest of the
evening there, he did remember going to Susan afterward. She held him
for a long time—not because she understood what was tearing him apart,
because she didn’t, but probably because she had never seen him cry
before.

Harry might have been able to live with it if it hadn’t been for the Man
from Mars. No, that doesn’t sound right; it sounds like blame. There
wasn’t anyone to blame, really, except maybe Harry himself, being what
he was.

It isn’t easy to describe what happened that evening when the Man from
Mars first talked to Harry. Correction again. Someone once said about
Einstein’s Theory of Relativity: it isn’t difficult to understand; it’s
just impossible to believe. All right? This is what happened:

First of all, the Man from Mars wasn’t a man and he wasn’t from Mars.
“The Man from Mars” is what Harry first called him, half kidding, half
abjectly terrified, and since he never had another name for him, he
stuck with “Man from Mars” though they both knew it was inaccurate.
Second, the Man from Mars did something—Harry never knew what—that
eliminated the terror completely. Finally, although he wasn’t invisible,
Harry never saw him, and even when the Man pointed at something on a
printed page or on one of the sketches or drawings or charts he asked
Harry to make from time to time, Harry could never if his life depended
on it describe what the hand (if it was a hand) or the finger (if it was
a finger) looked like. It was as if something diverted his attention
every time he started to look at the Man. Yet the presence was very
strong, very solid, very real. Well, it’s not all that strange, when you
come to think of it. A normal person can be hypnotized and ordered not
to see someone or something in a room, and he just plain cannot see it,
even if you put it right in front of him under bright lights. Whether it
was hypnosis or suggestion or something like them—or something
infinitely better—Harry did not know, didn’t want to know. One thing was
certain: nobody else saw (could see?) the Man, and no one but Harry ever
heard his questions.

His questions … only once did the Man from Mars ever make a statement.
He only asked questions. It seemed that he wanted to know about human
beings, and he had chosen Harry to give the answers. Why Harry? Harry
never knew, though he often thought that the Man might have made a
better choice. _Only_ Harry? Very probably not. Some of the questions he
asked carried a freight of previous knowledge; in such cases, it wasn’t
_the_ answer he was after but Harry’s answer. Again: why Harry? Harry
never knew.

So the Man from Mars appeared (funny word to use, under the
circumstances) one evening when Harry was alone, and asked him, “Mind
answering some questions?” and Harry, terrified, jumped up, looked this
way, that way, round and back, and blurted: “Who said that? Where are
you? What are you—a man from Mars or something?” It was eerie, because
there was this sense of the real presence, right there in the room; not
a voice from the street or from some other place in the house, and most
certainly not a hallucination—he was just too real, too, well, _here_.
It was exactly then that the man did whatever it was he did to erase
Harry’s terror, and never again did Harry feel frightened of the Man.
Not even awed. And he never wondered why.

“Mind answering some questions?”

“I guess not. Mind if I ask some?”

“Why should I object? What you want to know?”

Harry pondered. He felt quite comfortable. “How did you get in here?
Where did you come from?”

“Do you want a precise answer?”

“Well, sure,” said Harry.

“Are you acquainted with the theory of nonfluent time and the present
identity of all things, past and future?”

“Well, no,” said Harry.

“Then how can I possibly give you a precise answer?”

“Well, you must’ve come from somewhere!”

“Why?”

“Because you got here!”

“Isn’t ‘here’ somewhere?”

“Well, certainly.”

“Then does it satisfy you that I came from here?”

“No it doesn’t! You weren’t here before and you are now!”

“How can you tell?”

“Well, I never saw you. Heard you. I mean, I—I—oh hell, what do you
want, anyway?”

“Mind answering some questions?”

Back to square one! And this is what was to happen every time Harry
tried to get an idea of who or what the Man was, or why he wanted his
questions answered. He was always let around in a circle by his own
statements and responses. Sometimes it was a big circle and sometimes a
little circle, but it went round and round until Harry learned that the
only way was to give straight answers to the Man’s questions, and put a
sharp curb on his own. Besides, you have to understand that he felt
quite comfortable with the Man. Really.

Well, he asked questions. He asked questions about morals, about
politics, about entertainment, about technology. He asked about
pollution, war, religion, history, education, and finance. Sometimes
Harry knew the answers and sometimes not; he began a notebook so he
could go to the library for information. Sometimes the questions called
for opinions; sometimes Harry had very strong ones, sometimes none,
sometimes opinions he hadn’t known he had until he was asked.

Susan came in, that first night. She wanted to know who he was talking
to. Clearly, she couldn’t see the Man from Mars. He said he was talking
to himself. She didn’t believe him. He then said he was talking to the
Man from Mars. She said nothing, just went to bed. This happened a
number of times. About the third time he broke down and told her the
whole story. Shortly after that she moved out. These are very few words
to write about Susan, but this isn’t her story; and anyway, nothing that
happened was her fault in any way. But surely she knows that.

Another sadness for Harry.

He told the Man from Mars about his sadnesses, about what happened at
the Espresso and about Humboldt and the parrot, and about the feral
children. The feral children was for a long time the saddest thing he
knew, until it was replaced by Humboldt and then by Leary’s Class Three
mutation.

The feral children was, as a sadness, very difficult to explain. It was,
as Harry once expressed it, something you could just reach with your
fingertips, but never get a grip on. You could touch it did not grasp
it.

Feral children are those who have been brought up by with animals. They
round one up every few years in India, Africa, South America; there’s a
very famous case of one picked up in France in the 18th century. If
they’re captured when they are eleven or twelve years old, they have one
thing in common: they can never be taught to speak. “Yes” and “No” and
“Pass the salt,” sure; but the kind of verbal communication we take so
much for granted is impossible to them. A brain surgeon might tell you
that there is nothing detectibly wrong with them, but they just can’t
learn speech. Now, learning speech is as close to miraculous as anything
on this earth. Not for the accomplishment in itself, but because of who
does it—little kids. There was a family Harry had read about who lived
in India on one of those “stations” the English had during the Empire
days. They had three little kids, five, six, seven, and a French tutor
who would speak nothing to them but French, and an _amah_, a nursemaid,
who knew no English and spoke only Hindi. Those kids could speak English
and French and Hindi fluently, with no hesitation, depending on whom
they were talking to. A gifted adult might do the same, but never in so
short a time or without giving it total concentration and effort. A
normal adult, well, just couldn’t. And a normal child can, and many do,
what those English kids did.

Astronauts called that period of time in which it is possible to launch
a rocket at a certain target, taking into account all the variables, a
“window.” Before the window is open, you can’t launch and get where
you’re going. After it’s closed, you can’t launch. Well, it occurred to
Harry that there may be a “learning window,” like that that makes it
possible for normals to learn speech at a genius level, a window that
opens on _something else_. It was here that his fingers touched the
thing he couldn’t grasp—what that _something else_ might be. Maybe ESP
or telekinesis or that kind of thing, but maybe not—maybe something
different, something entirely new, something as incomprehensible to a
normal adult as the transistor or a sonnet would be to a Neanderthal—as
incomprehensible as normal speech is to a feral child. The feral child
had his speech window open for—how long is a speech window open? Months?
Two years, three?—but there was nobody around to put anything into it.
So in its own natural time, it closed, as it does for us all (except
maybe a thin crack) and the finest teachers with the best teaching
methods and devices can’t put anything through it ever again, except
maybe for a little thin bits pushed into the crack.

And this, in his collection of sadnesses, was unique, because it was the
only one he’d never heard or read about; he had worked it out for
himself. His conviction was absolute that there was such a window, that
it opened, stayed open, stayed open … and closed, never to be open
again, never to accept anything but slivers or flashes even if someone
should appear who had that _something else_ in full flower, and the
desire and ability to teach it. Down through the generations, child
after child had gone about in his jungle, with this window wide and
waiting, and while he scratched for food here and knowledge there,
nobody, nobody ever came along who was able to put that _something else_
through that special window, until, one day, the window was forever
closed. My Dad and Mom, thought Harry, never put anything into mine,
because their folks never put it into theirs, and when theirs were
open … back and back; Oh God, he would think, why didn’t the right
person come along back there somewhere and start it; where would we be
now.… It was a full-fledged, collectible sadness, but terribly difficult
to explain to anybody.

Whether or not the Man from Mars understood it, he was not sure. His
assumption was that the Man understood everything.

Harry, mysterious as it was to his friends and acquaintances, loved his
work. He was a statistical typist. You know those entire halfpages
you’ll see in the financial pages sometimes, lists of bonds by number,
all in tiny print, and all absolutely correct? That’s what he did, stuff
like that, and he could proofread it too. Maybe it was a natural talent,
plus years of practice, but he could move the figures from copy to eye
to keyboard with great speed and accuracy, and never let them touch his
mind at all. And that’s why he loved it, because nowhere else, not even
drowsing on the riverbank on a sunny Sunday, was his mind so free to
rove and ponder. The nature of the work meant no phones to answer,
hardly even a word to anyone all day: he had an IN box and an OUT box;
people slid paper in and took paper away and, unlike the riverbank, no
one whanged him awake with a misplaced frisbee or started fighting or
baby-bawling, and he was free of bird-droppings and ants.

During the many weeks of his communication with the Man from Mars, he
strove and drove to squeeze some pattern out of the questions, and the
kinds of questions, he was being asked (but there were so many of them,
and so many kinds!). Yet no one at work was aware of it—same old Harry,
doing the same old thing in the same way every day. And in the evenings
he simply stopped seeing anybody or going anywhere where he might; and
after Susan left, that was easy. So when things came to a head, there
was no one to know, no one to stop it.

“Could the earth produce enough food to take care of everybody on it?”

“I guess so. Yes, it could—I read that some place.”

“_Does_ the earth produce enough for everyone?”

“Oh no. Well, now—wait. We throw a lot away, here in this country and
others, too. And we eat more than we need to, that’s for sure. Seems
like seven, eight people out of ten are all the time trying to lose
weight. I dunno. Maybe if it was shared around, and all that money
didn’t go into junk and convenience food, yes, maybe we do produce
enough. It wouldn’t be much fun, though, eating, I mean.”

“What about energy?”

“Oh, you mean oil. We’re not in very good shape about oil. There’s not
enough of it in the right places, and the guys who have it are getting
more and more hard-nosed, and it is costing more all the time to find it
and get it out. We could have a war over that, if it gets tight enough.”

“Does energy mean oil?”

“Mostly it does. Then there’s natural gas, but the problem there is the
same as with oil, and we’re using it up awful awful fast. Then, coal.
There is plenty of coal, but the cheapest way to get it tears up whole
counties, and if the mining people have to straighten out the mess, the
cost goes up. And mostly it burns dirty, and to get clean burning fuel
out of it, or to make a substitute gasoline, that costs more again.”

“Is there no other kind of energy except through fossil fuels?”

“Oh sure. Geothermal, but that can be tapped in only a few places here
and there. Atomic—atomic fission, that is, but there’s a lot of worry
about where to bury the waste, because it’s radioactive and will stay
radioactive for a lot of years. We have a handhold on fusion, so I hear,
but it won’t be ready in any amount in a long time. There’s some new
work in wind power and even tidal energy from the sea, and solar power,
but none that amounts to much, yet. And yeah, methane and methanol. I
read some place where Los Angeles, California produces enough solid
waste every single day that if it could be turned into methane and
methanol, it could power the entire tier of Pacific states from Canada
to Mexico!”

“And there’s no effort to use this instead of fossil fuels?”

“Here and there—Seattle, St. Louis, a few farmers, maybe some more I
haven’t heard about.”

“Why isn’t a really major effort being made to get rid of fossil fuels
altogether?”

“Search me. Turning all our solid pollution into clean fuels like
methanol would get rid of most air pollution as well, right? I guess
it’s because fossil fuels offered the biggest profit the fastest, and
that just has to go on until they’re gone, no matter what the side
effects—even war.”

“Do you really need all the energy you use?”

“Well, we’re trying to cut down.”

Patiently, “Do you really need all the energy you use?”

“Well, no. I guess not. Not here, anyway. It’s like the food.”

At work, while eyes and fingers did their mindless thing, Harry mulled
over the true nature of the Man from Mars, who wasn’t a man, who wasn’t
from Mars. Right at the beginning he had said—asked—something about
synchronicity, something about past and future and “now” existing all at
once. Kurt Vonnegut, Jr., in _Slaughterhouse Five_, came up with an idea
like that, on the planet Tralfalmadore, where the natives could see
time, all of time, as if it were a long valley and they were looking
down on it from a mountaintop—beginning, middle, end, all of it. And we
think that time as a moving stream, sequential, linear, we are sealed
inside a tank car on a railroad running up through the valley, and we
could look out through lengths of four-inch pipe sticking out of the
tank car like naval rifles out of a battleship, and we could see the
scenery passing as the train moved up the valley, only we didn’t know it
was a train, we didn’t know it was moving, we thought we were seeing
events begin and progress and end.

Well, maybe that’s where the Man came from, or somewhere like it. There
are a lot of mystics and the like who come up with ideas like that: that
there’s really only one electron in the whole universe, and it travels
backward and forward in time so it seems to reproduce itself
exponentially. Some say consciousness affects the universe, even creates
it; some say the universe _is_ a consciousness. It’s not only mystics:
some far out, high-altitude physicists are going that route.

Harry wasn’t about to pull a theory out of such a cosmic quagmire, not
one he could believe. What he could and did believe is that the Man was
real, as real as an IBM typesetter or a ham on rye. Given that, he had
to accept the idea that the Man came from a place where all of time was
visible and reachable. Maybe in a place like that time and space and
matter and energy were interchangeable, like Einstein suspected; if so
the notion of transforming one into the other (like transforming
electricity into heat or mechanical motion and back again) wasn’t so
hard to follow. If you can look calmly at the idea that all times exist
simultaneously, then you can look at the idea that all places are
likewise “here.” To travel from one place to another is done by not
traveling at all, but by being totally aware of the “hereness” of the
place you want to be. This takes no time, and in this sense there is no
distance, and the limitations of the speed of light have nothing to do
with it.

“Wow,” said Harry, loud enough to cause a financial editor to swivel
around in his chair; but Harry went on working and the editor swiveled
back.

What he dredged up out of all this was that no matter where or when the
Man came from, he probably knew the future; and (although up to now
Harry had not been particularly successful at it) had allowed that he
was willing to answer questions. Maybe Harry just hadn’t asked the right
questions.

Well, now he would.

He felt good.

He felt—armed.

“Would it make a difference in this world,” asked the Man from Mars, “if
every person treated every other person exactly the way he or she would
like to be treated?”

“A difference? It wouldn’t be this world. It would be heaven. Anyway it
can’t happen here.” He felt very sure of this one. He’d been through
this one in college. “What you are talking about is the Golden Rule. A
very old idea. I once read a collection of quotations from seventeen
major religions, and every single one of them said the same thing,
although the phrasing was slightly different. ‘Do unto others as you
would have them do unto you.’ ‘Do as you would be done by.’ A fine old
notion, but it can’t work.”

“Why not?”

“Well, take a big simple example. Balance of trade. When a country
exports more than it imports—sells more than it buys—that’s called a
‘favorable balance of trade.’ If you’re the seller and I’m the buyer,
you win on the deal; to the extent you win, I lose.”

“So it isn’t a balance?”

“Of course it isn’t. If men and nations started treating each other by a
Golden Rule sort of balance, maybe nobody would lose—but nobody would
win either, and that’s where it breaks down.”

“Wouldn’t the whole world win?”

Harry hit himself on the chest. “Number One here wouldn’t—couldn’t win,
and that’s intolerable to a man or nation.”

“Is there no feeling that all men are one, that all of them get tired in
the same way, or hungry, or happy?”

“There’s a word for that. Em-something. Empathy. Feeling with someone
else’s fingertips, seeing through someone else’s eyes. ‘Walk a mile in
another man’s moccasins,’ some Indian said. Sympathy, now, there’s a lot
of that from time to time, like when someone has an earthquake or a
typhoon or something. But empathy, there’s not too much of that around.”

“Is there no teaching not only that all men are one, but that all things
are one thing?”

“Oh sure. Millions of people practice a religion that says just that.
They go around chanting a word: _Aum_ or _Om_ that means (if I
understand it right) both ‘one’ and ‘all.’ And they keep saying to each
other (and anyone else who happens along) ‘Thou art God.’ But I can’t
see how it’s changed the way the world is run in any important way. But
speaking of ‘Thou arts,’ I have a couple questions to ask, and I think
you’ll agree it’s time I had my innings.”

“You wish to question me?”

“Yes I wish.”

“Are you aware that any correctly structured question embodies its own
answer, and therefore need not be asked?”

“No you don’t!” rapped Harry. “I’m not getting led around the corral and
right back to the gate again, not this time.”

“What is your question?”

“Questions, plural. First: do you know the future?”

“What future is that? Yours? This nation’s? Your species’? This planet?
What you call the universe, perhaps, or what I call it?”

Harry had to admit that that was a good response. He certainly wasn’t
calling for a detailed chronology of the cosmos from now on out to the
next Big Bang. He did feel, too, that buried in that response somewhere
was “Yes.” It certainly wasn’t a “No.”

“Okay, okay, I see I’ll have to take it by little steps or you’ll lose
me. Let’s start with you, and your ‘correctly structured questions.’ If
they need not be asked, how come you’ve been asking? Wouldn’t the World
Almanac have done a better job for you?”

“Is there anything in the World Almanac which deals, not with facts, but
with your perception of the facts? Is there any way to study that
without questioning _you?_”

“All right, I can buy that. It isn’t my world and my time you’re
studying, but how a man of my world and my time thinks about it. Hmp. I
really think we’re getting somewhere.” Also, he was more than a little
flattered, but he wouldn’t say that. “Now, about that mutation I told
you about, that would turn out to be meaningless unless it was
identified, understood, exercised: was the man right?”

“Can there be any doubt?”

That was as close to a flat ‘Yes’ as he gotten so far. He was
increasingly pleased.

“And has it been identified and understood?”

“Haven’t you heard the chants of _Om?_ Aren’t you aware of all the
consciousness-raising groups, the Macro Philosophy, TA, TM, the Self
Realization Fellowship, and all those people you yourself describe (and
there are nearly a billion of them by now, by the way) as going around
saying ‘Thou art God’?”

“Then we’ve found it, we’ve got it, we’ve saved it! right?”

_AUTHOR’S NOTE:_

_This manuscript arrived in my mailbox, forwarded from one of my
publishers. The covering letter was signed “Susan” but neither it nor
the envelope bore a return address. And with the manuscript was a sealed
envelope. I give you excerpts from Susan’s letter, with my annotations_.

_“Harry’s notebook was found on his desk with a letter to me clipped to
it. The letter is personal, so I’m not sending it, but the part about
you is, he wanted me to type up what he wrote double-spaced,
inch-and-a-half margins, one side of the paper, pages numbered. [She
did—impeccably. TS] he said to send it to you, maybe you can get it
published. He said maybe you better use your name, it might have a
better chance that way. He said if they pay you any money, keep it, you
earned it because of something you wrote long time ago. He said you
would know what that was. [I don’t. TS]_

_“He said after I typed the last page to put it in a separate envelope
and seal it. He wanted you to look at what he wrote and think about it a
while before reading the last page and decide whether it is too
dangerous to print, some people might get upset_.

_“I have to tell you I am upset. I feel real bad about the whole thing.
To me what he wrote is a suicide note. My shrink says it is usual for a
survivor to feel responsible for a death, especially if it is or might
be a suicide, so don’t worry, I’ll get over it, thousands have. Anyway
he had a bad heart. I think the story is very sad. Harry likes sad
things. I once told him sad things make him happy. If that is so and
this is the saddest thing he ever dreamed up, then he died happy. I
guess that is a bitter thing to say but I will leave it lay. Like I
said, I’m upset. Harry and I had a good thing going for quite a while
until he got the crazies with talking to himself and all and I took
off_.

_“One thing I can tell you, why it is he wrote this thing in third
person ‘He’ instead of first-person ‘I.’ My shrink believes in journals,
the patient should write about himself in third person, it makes him
stand off from himself. I told Harry that and I think that’s why he did
it. They found him dead at his desk at home week ago Monday, he must of
died right after he finished the letter to me. Don’t try to find me, I
just did what he wanted, now I don’t want any part of this anymore, and
thank you.”_

_I read the story without the last page, and then I read the last page.
In Susan’s words, because “I just did what he wanted,” (and I’m
intuitively sure that is what he wanted) I give you his last page. Rest
in peace, Harry_.

And the Man from Mars hesitated, for the very first time; and in that
exceedingly brief moment, Harry had a flash of insight that cut deep
into his marrow. It was this: that he had been insulated against fear by
this Man; and when you have no fear, you may not be reached by anyone
else’s emotion. Anger can’t reach the fearless, danger, hopelessness,
despair; fear is the trigger to the healthy survival mechanisms of fight
and of flight; fear also is the measure of that which is dear and
cherished: fear of its loss. Never until now had Harry perceived the
slightest hint of emotion from the Man; but now, in that slight
hesitation, a hot wave of emotion burst from him and sliced through the
barrier of fearlessness—and was gone. Harry identified it. It was
compassion.

“Do you really want to know?”

Fearless again, Harry responded: “I asked you, didn’t I?”

Then it was (for the very first time) that the Man from Mars uttered
something that was not a question, something that described a species
rocketing up away from and above all others, using only a part of its
gift, and the world that must ensue from that terrible and tragic
imbalance.

“Identifying it and understanding it are not enough. The appearance of
great and gifted gurus is not enough. Can the professor of speech teach
a feral child?

“No, Harry; it cannot be taught. It is too late. The gift is lost. The
window is closed. It closed nearly three thousand years ago.”

Then he left, and Harry went and got his notebook and began to write.



TIME WARP


He was sleek and he was furry; he was totally amphibious, and Althair
the Adventurer was what he really was. However, he was known, on his
lovely planet Ceer, as Althair the Storyteller just because he did that
better—better even than adventuring, at which he was a marvel.

His people called his planet “Ceer, the planet indetectable,” and that
it really was. It had no smoke or factories, machines or jails or
presidents; just uncommanded beauty made of waves and wilderness. It had
a kind of shrub-tree plant that would yield to mental pressure and
produce the living living-shelters, cupping coolness by day and hoarding
heat at night.

A heavy planet, Ceer, with strong inhabitants, who had still stronger
minds—so strong that with a ceremony they had linked their minds
together and created an integument, a kind of shell, a shield around
their worlds that bent all outside rays and gravities. Reflecting and
occulting nothing, it concealed the planet’s mass, and more: concealed
its absence; yet the peopled plains and oceans could see the friendly
stars unhampered. The peoples’ name was Zado.

Story time! Story time! Slithering, lithe, surfing, sliding,
inchworming, crackly-whiskered, beady-bright, soft, smooth and shining,
came the young, the pups and pammies gathering round. Story time! Story
time!

Althair, a tower in a sea excited, waited out the shouldering,
scrabbling, let-me-near silenting, until at last _they_ did all the
waiting.

“Today, I will tell you (Althair began) of the planet Orel and the
horror that happened there; but first I must tell you about a pup and
pammie older than yourselves who were just about as big as me, and lived
on a planet with the name Earth. Their names were Will Hawkline and
Jonna Verret.…” (There was a clatter of chittering giggles as the little
Zados tried to say the funny names and could not. Althair let them try,
then raised his head. They shushed.)

“Will Hawkline and Jonna Verret lived on an island renamed Avalon, which
they had made beautiful and kept beautiful, and saw hardly at all for
their working. Will was very important, being Coordinator of the Time
Center, which means he said what to do and everybody did it. Jonna was
the best test pilot he had, which means when Time Center built
something, she tried it out. Way down deep Will was angry at Jonna,
though he never said it and maybe didn’t know it. He wished for a test
pilot bigger and older than he was, so he could tell him what to do and
see him do it. Jonna was younger and smaller and she was a pammie but
good is good and there’s no arguing that. So he was angry because she
was a pammie and she was the best in the world at what she did.”
(Althair boomed along with the chittering chuckles. It certainly was
funny.)

There were lots of other people on Avalon, of course, but they’re not
really in this story, except for the Little Johns. Now the Little Johns
were very special. You see, Earth people were slowpokes, so they built
things called computers which could logic much faster than they could.
The first Little John had the strange ability to think himself into a
computer, or think the computer into himself. So he could then do
create/computing almost as well as a Zado—as long as he was linked to a
computer. Without a computer he was just another slowpoke. So they
cloned him a dozen times, creating a dozen Little Johns.

That’s what the Time Center was all about—to stop Earth from being a
slowpoke. When they wanted to go to another star, they could get inside
a big metal jug and fly it in real-time, which took so long they had to
go to sleep until they got there a long time later. Then when they got
back to Earth the same way, all their friends were long ago dead of old
age. _Or_, they could get into a different kind of jug and fly to the
star faster than light, and not have to go to sleep for hundreds of
lifetimes; but when they got back, time had still passed on Earth and
their friends had still died away. Earth time and jug time were just too
different.

But Will Hawkline, with the help of his computers and his people and the
Little Johns, Will Hawkline did it! He found a way to separate time from
space-time, so his little jugs could go _back_ a little way in time
while they went forward a long way in space—all at once! That way space
travelers could go away to a star and come back again, while the people
they loved were still alive to welcome them and listen to their stories.
I know that’s a long funny way to solve a problem, but then they weren’t
Zados, and you have to admire them. Jonna Verret tested the new little
jugs—_scouts_ is the Earth name for them—and they worked, and because
they worked, a terrible thing happened. And now I will tell you about
Mindpod, and Orel.

No one knows when or where it came from, but a great dark jug landed on
the planet Orel, and in it were twenty-six _things_, alive and awful,
which together are called Mindpod. Zados are not the only ones in the
universe who can link minds, but unlike us, the Mindpod used their
linkage as a weapon.

Orel was a wild place where the biggest animal was a meercath, a lizard
with thick quick hind legs and small deft hands, bigger than me, with a
toothy mouth that could take off my head, and a mind just good enough to
feed and be happy. In a _blip!_ the Mindpod had those meercaths’ minds,
and all they would do forever after was to make weapons and go off to
other worlds to kill and destroy. Nothing could ever give them back
their own minds. A meercath commanded by the Mindpod is a terrible
thing. And there were enough worlds within reach of the Mindpod’s big
dark jug—the Earth word for it is _cruiser_—that the Mindpod itself
could rest safely on Orel for a very long time, and take other worlds
that take other worlds and Oh! (Oh! cried the young ones. Oh! they
wept.)

The Mindpod cruiser had in it all sorts of structures and inventions
that could do things that the Mindpod could not—they were rather like
Earth people that way, but not at all funny. They had feeler things and
listening things and find-out things so that they knew right away what
had happened when Jonna tested the back-in-time jug, the little one she
called a ‘scout.’ That made the Mindpod afraid. When the Mindpod was
afraid it was immediately very, very angry. It knew how to travel in
zero time but it didn’t know how to travel back in time, so the Mindpod
sent a cruiser toward Earth to steal and destroy.

On Avalon, in Time Center Control, Jonna had just come in from the last
of her flights. She stood proud and happy, happy because she had done
everything right, happy for Will too, because it was truly a great thing
he had done. Will Hawkline looked at her, how she stood smiling, her
hair a bright tumble, her eyes pleased and giving. Just for a moment his
regret that she was a pammie and not a bigger and older pup grew smaller
and he smiled and took her hand.

At that moment the very walls boomed with a terrible voice:

_Attention Time Center: You have one complete revolution of your planet
to prepare all records of your experiments and to have yourselves and
the records ready for pickup. One hour later planet detonation will
occur, whether or not you are planetside_.

Will Hawkline, still holding Jonna’s hand though he had quite forgotten
it, bawled “Little John!”

Immediately Little John Five stepped up—a big Earth person, strong as a
Zado, with close golden hair and eyes very wide apart. Will Hawkline
cried: “I have done a terrible thing, but—how could I know? Who are
they? What do they want? Can they do what they say?”

The large growing eyes closed; and now the Little John was one with the
big computer and its instant logic and immense memory. He said,
“Subspace wake-trace indicates that they came in zero time from
OREL—Orion Remote Earthtype Landbase. Who they are: No data, except that
they are not indigenous to Orel. Can they do what they say: All relevant
data indicate that they can, to a probability of 99.11 nines. Could you
have known: You could not. What do they want: Clearly, it is the
back-in-time scout device; if they had it they would have used it, and
would have struck before our tests.”

“But if we don’t give it to them, they’ll blow us up anyway, and then
they’ll never have it.”

“Which indicates they are afraid of it. If they can’t have it, no one
will have it.”

“Then they’ve given us the answer.” When Will Hawkline made up his mind,
he did it altogether. “If they’re _afraid_ of it, we’ll use it. We’ll
arrive on Orel before they leave and stop them.” He turned to Harper
Townsend, his chief of operations. “Harper—are both scouts ready for
launch?” At his nod: “Jonna—are you willing to take a Little John and go
to Orel, while I take the other scout and rendezvous with you before
they attack?”

Her face told him how ready and willing she was.

“Then let’s go! Harper, put every computer on the problem of destroying
that cruiser—but don’t make a move until the last minute, or they’ll
strike before the deadline.”

He sprinted toward the launch gate and only then realized he was still
holding Jonna’s hand—he almost pulled her off her feet. “Sorry,” he said
and was gone. She looked sadly at her hand. “Sorry?” she said, then
turned and ran for her own scout, shouting for Little John Twelve.

And you know, by the time they were in their scouts, the Little Johns
and the computers had worked out every single figuring they needed to
make the trip back in time, forth in space, to Orel before the Mindpod
cruiser left.

At that very moment, on the place in the dark cruiser where the devices
that made it go were—the Earth word is “bridge”—a meercath left his lace
of blinking lights and came to the commander. “There are stowaways,
sir.” (That’s the way they talk in jugs. And a stowaway is a person who
gets on a jug or whatever they call them, without anyone knowing.)
“Stowaways, sir. I thought at first there were three, then it seemed
like four. Anyway, it’s certainly two.”

“Start a search then,” the commander said. “Every compartment, room,
pathway.” The meercath went away, and another one called out, “Small
craft leaving the planet, sir.” But even as they fixed their look-at
thing on it and spit fire, the scout slipped into faster-than-light and
was lost to them. Just then another appeared, and a great fan of flame
swept out from the Orellian cruiser and sliced off a tail section just
before this scout flung itself into faster-than-light and also escaped
the attack.

None of us could possibly know what it’s like to fly out in one of those
little scouts. Acceleration squeezes you backward until you can’t
breathe any more and you can’t see anything right or really think
straight, and all of a sudden there’s a great bloom of light, a spinning
spiral, and you’re in another universe full of grey shapes that make you
dizzy when you look at them. In time—how much time depends how far in
real-space you are going—you’re back in this universe, blinking at a
whole different set of stars, with a strange planet floating nearby.
Terrifying.

But for Will Hawkline it was infinitely worse. Seconds before they
slipped into faster-than-light, “We’re hit!” Little John Five cried out,
and Will Hawkline said, “Too bad, but we’re counting down and we’re
going out anyway!” At that, the bloom of light spiraled around them and
they were in the grey place, and—_crunch-ring-blang_—things broke in the
scout’s insides. Their lights went out and flared bright and dim again.
“Damage report,” Will Hawkline ordered, and the Little John told him a
long list of awful things. “Can you get a fix on Jonna?” And that was
worst of all.

“She’s on Orel—on the surface!”

“Captured,” Will Hawkline whispered, and oh, he had a feeling inside
himself he didn’t know he could feel. “She’s alive though,” he
almost-said, almost asked. “She’s alive,” said the Little John. “But
they are doing something to her.”

Oh yes they were doing something to her. She was flat out under a
force-beam with a fearful light shining on and through her, and bending
over her was one of the actual members of the Mindpod; and I can’t tell
you what it looked like because no one’s told me, except that it was
horrible beyond description so that even if I could I wouldn’t. And it
said:

“We have placed a substance in your bloodstream which will kill you in a
very special way. There is an antidote, but after a certain time it will
become ineffective, and you will stay locked in a world of visions so
dreadful that you will die of your own free will to escape them. So
quickly now: answer my questions. What was the mission? What kind of
work was going on at your Time Center? Who were you trying to contact
when we captured your scout …?”—question, question, question.

Jonna lay there and spoke only once: “Little John Twelve was right.” And
then she wouldn’t explain. For when the tractor beam from Orel took
them, Little John Twelve said to her quietly, talking the way Little
Johns do: “The probability of escape is negligible. My ability to refuse
the information they will demand, not only of me, but of the entire
contents of our computer banks, is equally negligible. There is
therefore only one reasonable course. It has been nice knowing you,
Jonna Verret,” whereupon he smiled slightly and died.

She remembered wondering through her shock and fear what it must be like
to be a clone among clones. He was as real as she was, yet dying could
hardly be the same thing, for all the Little Johns had complete access
to everything Twelve had ever done or thought or felt, so in a way he
would live on in all of them, more than a memory.

Now, helpless under the light, his words rang in her mind: “There is
therefore only one reasonable course …” and she closed her eyes. But she
didn’t know how to die this way, and she did not know—yet—if she really
wanted to.

And the light burned on, and the questions rained down, and it seemed
that the pod member’s face (if that could indeed be a face) grew larger
and larger until it filled the room, the planet, and the endless space
outside, and its wet pores grew into caves and from them came dripping
horrors with pointed, poisoned teeth and sounds more ghastly than any
sight, sounds rising growlhowl scream shriek, and loud and more and huge
and new worse sights ashake, ashudder and tearing apart with the noise
absolute; and all at once dead quiet so sudden it was agony, and in a
dim radiance stood Will Hawkline smiling, smiling at last right at her,
his eyes captured by hers, his hand out, _his arms out_, and, and, a
spear of white metal striking up from somewhere, entering his breast and
emerging scarlet from the top of his head, and oh, his look of complete
astonishment as she screamed at last, then all was dark, then she was
gone.…

“Gone,” said Little John Five in the scout with Will Hawkline. “She’s
gone.”

Never knowing Jonna’s last most terrible illusion, Will Hawkline asked,
out of a dry throat, “What do you mean gone?” feeling again that which
he had not known he could feel.

“No sign now from Orel, not from her.… Are you well? Your breathing
stopped.” It started again with a great shudder. The Little John said,
“And yet I have her life signals.… No, this can’t be. This is not in my
data banks.”

_“What? What?”_

“The life signals come from another place.… Not Orel at all, but nowhere
else either. No chart or surveyor probe has ever reported anything but
emptiness just there. And yet—I get her sign.”

“Pull out of this into real-space, and set a course, and go there,
wherever she is,” Will cried harshly.

“But Orel … the cruiser … the detonation of Earth—”

“Five, I order you.” And the Little John obeyed, saying only, “You know
we’re damaged,” and did the things necessary to fling them into the
real. A moment’s observation and the Little John had set the new course
and flung them spiraling into the grey. “You still get signs?”

“Naturally not.”

“What do you mean naturally not?”

“Forward in space, backward in time,” the Little John said. “Have you
forgotten? She will not have arrived there yet. Wherever ‘there’ is.”

Off they went then, back in time, forward in space, until they emerged;
and there, where all the data banks everywhere said there was nothing,
was a planet in orbit around a distant star—distant enough and so
erratically aflame that there had never been (would be) a reason to look
for perturbations. They stared at the world in wonder until Will
Hawkline said, “It’s molten. The planet’s molten!”

“Yes. It’s newborn.”

“We’ve come _that far back?_” And the Little John answered, “We’re
damaged.”

“Orbit in close,” said Will Hawkline, “and speed up our time.”
Reluctantly the scout responded and they watched in fascination the
agonies of a molten ball becoming a world, its heaving throes and spouts
of lava, gouts of flame and writhes of color as the strata turned up
edgewise and sank again; then a nearly endless time of clouds and
fireflickers, and the emergence of land and oceans, land that stayed,
land that sank, oceans roaring across land newly alive with grasses just
invented.

And at last the beauty came, and calm—isthmus and estuary making firm
agreements with the island-dotted sea, and life flourishing at last,
sure and powerfully evolving. And for Will, a growing sense of presence,
of a newer kind of mind, strong and gentle and sane and fearless. “Do
you feel it?”

“Feel what?” And by ‘what,’ Will Hawkline knew that a Little John, for
all his mental powers, could not feel certain things.

Then together, they gasped.

It was—_gone_. The planet vanished! All about them the stars shone, the
distant sun flamed, but this world was gone Because he felt what he
felt, Will Hawkline said, “Tighten your orbit. Move in closer.”

“Orbit around what? Closer to _what?_ There’s nothing there anymore! I
can’t see it, my instruments can’t see it.…” Will Hawkline had never
seen a Little John so upset. But he could feel the emanations of Mind
close by, and he smiled and said, “Pretend it’s still there, and go
down.”

Obediently the Little John did it. Nothing, and nothing, and _“ah.”_

And of course you know where they were, and when. They had witnessed the
birth of our dear Ceer, and the beginnings of our shield, and had now
passed inside it and were filled with wonder.

“Her signs! Her signs! She’s alive here!” The Little John was really
excited: amazing! And just then the scout gave a sickening lurch and
Will himself overrode the computerized controls and summoned his old
skill as a pilot—trained to manage these flying things with his own two
hands. He righted it, but lost a great deal of altitude, and the scout
apparently disliked his firmness because it fought back and set up a
great grinding clatter from somewhere inside it. “Where is she?” he
shouted over the noise.

“Over there, right at the base of the peninsula! But there’s a
mountain …”

Will Hawkline saw it, then lost it in the rush of clouds and rain that
swept down on it. He turned toward where he thought Jonna was.

“Climb! Climb!”

“Climb she won’t,” Will said grimly. “Anyway, I don’t see any mountain
now,” which was perfectly true. As if insulted, the mountain reached up
a high crag, or seemed to, and gouged out a slit a third of the way down
the hull, throwing the nose of the scout almost straight up. Through the
slit, which stopped just under his feet, he got a split-second glimpse
of the peninsula and a wide flat meadow. As the nose came down he swung
it that way. The scout tilted to the left and wouldn’t correct, and they
came in like that, skittered and slid, nose down, up and over, and it
was all black everywhere and quiet.

The first thing Will Hawkline saw as he came out of the blackness was
something he couldn’t believe.

Me.

The next thing he knew was that the warm pillow under his head spoke to
him: “Will … Oh Will—are you all right?” It had Jonna Verret’s voice
because the pillow was Jonna Verret’s lap. He tipped his head back and
looked at her and then again at me, and tried to sit up and scrabble
backwards at once. I think he was afraid. Maybe my teeth. Jonna said,
“It’s all right, Will. That’s Althair. He pulled you out of the scout.”

“What was left of it,” said the Little John. Will saw him sitting on the
floor nearby. He had a bump over one eye but seemed well otherwise. They
were in what Will thought was a polished wooden cave. Well, what would
you think if you’d never seen one of our living living-places before?

Anyway, you never heard such a flurry of questions in your life, and if
it hadn’t been for Little John Five sitting there nodding his big golden
head every now and then, I don’t think Will Hawkline would have believed
a word of it. He had to know all about Ceer and we Zados, and the shield
we thought up around our planet, and why we have no machines, and how we
grow living-places and see-far and move to other worlds when we want to,
without jugs.

“The Zados took me away from the Mindpod on Orel,” Jonna told him.
“Right out from under a force-beam. They brought me here and stopped the
poison the Mindpod had put into my blood and made me well all over, even
my head.” And Will had to believe it, because she was here. But when I
tried to explain how that making where she was, the only place in the
universe she couldn’t be (so she disappeared) and Ceer the only place in
the universe she could be, he couldn’t understand it. Slowpokes think
tools, you see. When they want to do something, the first thing they
look for is something outside of themselves to do it with; tools,
machines, inventions. They can do a lot with tools, but that kind of
thinking keeps them from doing things the simple way, which is why they
are slowpokes. What makes them so funny is that they don’t have to be
slowpokes, and they just are.

Will Hawkline was very very bright; you have to understand that. He had
to be, to have become Coordinator of his Time Center on Avalon while
still so young. As I told you, that is a very high place to reach on
Earth. But he was bright in a way that made things a lot more difficult
than they had to be. He never stopped asking questions, which is a fine
thing in itself, but when he couldn’t understand the answers, he wanted
to stop and work at it, and found it very hard just to accept and go on.
We can do certain things, we Zados. We had proved it to him. But it was
very uphill for him to use what we could do without knowing how it
worked, and without tools and inventions to test all the parts.
_Acceptance_ is the big word. Acceptance was very hard for Will
Hawkline.

Little John Five was no problem. He could think like a living thinker,
but he was conditioned by computers and computers can’t think. Computers
now_—they_ know the meaning of acceptance. And Jonna … well, she was a
pammie, and Earth pammies are sort of special, and seem to be able to
know a great many things without needing to be told. Acceptance is
easier for them.

By this time, of course, I knew all about the terrible things the Pod
had done to Jonna on Orel (we had known about the Mindpod by our own
mindnet from the moment they landed there, and had been watching) and
also about the threat to Earth. And we had worked out a plan.

To do it, we would have to get into the caves under the big
basket-cradle, the Little John called it, which held the Orellian
cruiser on the surface of Orel. (Orel is mostly porous under the
surface, great chains and tangles of holes and caves.) We could then try
to get into the cruiser itself and see what we could do from there.

Getting to Orel was a lot harder than it had to be, mostly because of
Will Hawkline’s insistence on understanding everything we did. When I
told him that the Zado High Council would convene for the ritual which
would take us to Orel, he wanted to know where the council would meet,
and I had to explain that it didn’t actually meet at any certain place;
the mindnet could be cast wherever the Council Zados happened to be.
Then I had to tell him what to do with his own mind, which is just
_accept_. And at first he wouldn’t and then he couldn’t, and I had a
time, I tell you, showing him how he could. I didn’t want him to see me
laughing, and really, that was the hardest part.

I got them all comfortable and convened the High Council and we started
to weave the Net that would send us to Orel. And wouldn’t you know the
moment the Ceer-reality began to fade around us, up pops Will Hawkline,
bolt upright, demanding to know what’s happening, and of course he broke
the net and we had to start all over.

I was going to speak to him but Jonna said, “Let me,” and went and sat
down beside him. She took both his hands and looked into his eyes and
said, “Will—just let it happen. Trust,” she said. “Trust. Go with me.”
And while she held him with her hands and her eyes I quickly convened
again. We got a good Net this time. The glowing sound-beds of shimmer
lifted us and _blip!_ we were in the caves on Orel.

Whatever Will Hawkline or any of them were going to say then, they
didn’t say it. Not so much because of the caves themselves, the crazy
light (there are patches of luminescent rock, blue and green, and
reddish moss and fungus that glows purple) and the odd smell of the air;
none of this. It was the meercath standing there, scratching its stomach
with one of its little hands. It was wearing a harness with a heat
weapon stuck on it. It was the first meercath the Earth folk had ever
seen and I guess I don’t blame them for being upset. Jonna made a little
scream and the Little John opened his big eyes wide, and Will Hawkline
slapped a weapon out of his belt and _whsssht!_ blew the meercath’s big
head right off.

I was not pleased about that. I had never thought to tell them, but I
had a shield around us just like the one we put around Ceer, and the
meercath never knew we were there. But now that Will Hawkline had used
his weapon, the whole planet, or anyway the Mindpod, knew it and knew
where we were. I didn’t tell him this. Zados do not say things that make
anyone unhappy. Will Hawkline was pleased and it was too late to correct
what he had done. I took the heat weapon away from the dead meercath and
gave it to Will Hawkline and showed him how to use it, and asked him for
his; I told him the Mindpod could find us instantly if it was used
again, but the meercath’s weapon would be harder to trace.

Then we ran. Oh, we ran! I led them through the caves and into the
labyrinth under the cradle, and you know I couldn’t create the shield
while we were moving that fast. Another meercath saw us and set up that
horrible wailing cry, and in a moment it was coming from everywhere. We
ran through the green and blue, through patches of purple, and soon
there came the bright orange flare of the heat weapons.

At last we were where I wanted us to be, right under the cradle, but it
happened to be a blind corridor as well. If the meercaths found us here
it would be a bad thing. As long as we were running they would try to
bring us down with their heat-things, but if they had us trapped they
would catch us and pull us apart and bite. That’s the way the Mindpod
trained them.

There was only one thing I could do—make a little mindnet and get us out
of there. But I would need their help. Jonna and Little John Five seemed
to understand right away what I needed—just to relax, give themselves to
me and the net—and oh, how I wished Will Hawkline was a little less
curious, a little less brave, and maybe a little more stupid! I will
give him credit: he tried, but then he saw the meercaths, two, three,
then seven, eight, nine of them. I instantly threw up the shield—I
didn’t need their help for that—and they could not see us, and in a
moment they would have moved on to search somewhere else. But Will
Hawkline could see them as clearly as we can see the stars here on Ceer,
and he raised the meercath heat-thing I had given him and sent a great
orange flash down the corridor. Two of the meercaths went down howling,
and then they all knew for sure where we were.

Will Hawkline went down on one knee and steadied his weapon, and I
thought, “That is the tool-craziest slowpoke in all the Known and
Unknown!” I shouted in words and inside their heads to Jonna and the
Little John: _give me you!_ and they did, and while the meercaths were
wading through the horrible mess Will had made in the corridor, I flung
the energy they gave me, together with my own, against the soft rocks
overhead and a huge section came crashing down, shutting it off.

In the sudden silence and swirling dust I said to Will Hawkline, “Now if
you can’t do what I ask, don’t do _anything!_” as gently as I could.
Maybe it was this or maybe the way Jonna and the Little John looked at
him, but he became very quiet and almost helpful.

I called on the Ceer net with the precise locus, and as around us the
cave faded away, metal walls, flat and dark, took their place. We were
inside the Orellian cruiser, and almost before we could take a breath,
we had that crazy spinny inside-out feeling of space travel, zero time.
The cruiser had lifted. It was a close thing.

It probably took us a little while to be able to think straight—you pups
and pammies will never know what a wringing out you get from traveling
that way. Once I got my wits back, I looked around. Flat metal walls.
Dark. I made it a little lighter. Jonna and Will were stretched out, I
guess still waiting for their minds to catch up with them. Little John
Five was sitting up wagging his big head.

“Five,” I said, “can you think-in to the computer on this cruiser?”

He looked at me. If he was surprised to see me shining in the dark he
didn’t say so. He closed his eyes and made some sort of effort. He
opened his eyes and said, “It’s different.…”

“You have to expect that. But isn’t it the same in some ways?”

He closed his eyes again. After a while he nodded his head. “In a lot of
ways.”

“Can you learn it?”

“I think so.”

“You do that, Five. Think-in all the way. Think-in so far that when they
start looking for us with their finder-thing, they will think you are
another part of their own computer. Can you see out of their see-it
thing? I want to know where we are,” I said. “I’ll help,” I said.

He tried hard. I picked up what he mindsaw and made it shine on the dark
wall. It was like a window. There was a planet.…

“My God,” I heard behind me, “that’s Earth!”

“There’s Avalon—see?”

“All right, that’s where we are. I would like to know _when_ we are,” I
said.

“I do not have the referents,” the Little John said.

“I do. _Look!_” Will Hawkline cried out. In the picture, from the curve
of the planet’s shoulder, came a tiny golden spark. “A scout,” said
Jonna Verret. “It’s … could it be …”

Across the picture came a line of fire, at almost the exact moment the
scout winked out in that special way a craft flares when it slips into
faster-than-light. A moment later another spark appeared, the fire
speared out and sliced into the tail section just before the ship
disappeared. Somehow, the faster-than-light change came when it was
strangely brighter than the first one.

“It—it’s us. _Me_. They’re going to do terrible things to—to her.”

I decided to do a kind thing. I used a piece of the net and made it say
to Jonna, deeply, “Sleep.” And I said to Will Hawkline, “Sleep.” They
slept. They slept so deeply that even the Mindpod’s probes and
search-sees wouldn’t know they were there. Then I said to the Little
John: “Five: they are hidden in a special way, and I can put up my own
shield. By now you know how they will search; can you make yourself seem
like part of their computer? So much so they will not find you?” He said
he could. Then I told him what to do.

When it was right, I got the net to bring Will Hawkline and Janna up and
up through their deeps until they were normally asleep, and then I woke
them.

Immediately Little John Five said, “The computer reports stowaways. A
meercath has told the commander.”

I said, “That’s all right.”

The Little John said, “The commander has ordered a search.”

I said, “That’s all right too.”

Jonna said, “Can we hide somewhere?”

I said I didn’t think so—not for long.

Jonna said, “You can’t mean for us just to sit here until they come for
us!”

“They won’t take us without a fight,” Will Hawkline said, and he took
the meercath heat-thing out of his belt; and wouldn’t you know before I
could say another word the door of the compartment crashed open and
there stood a meercath guard. Will aimed his weapon and of course
nothing happened because I had taken the charges out while he slept. I
had neglected, however, to remove one patch of stupidity or his
appalling bravery. As the giant meercath opened his mouth to squall,
Will Hawkline flung himself across the compartment and shoved the weapon
between all those big teeth and into the meercath’s throat. And he
didn’t stop with that. With the momentum of his rush he placed a hand on
the meercath’s head and vaulted up and around, clamping his legs above
and below the meercath’s long snout, forcing its jaws closed. I
remembered then that all big lizards, especially the one with long jaws,
might have, like a meercath, a bite powerful enough to nip someone my
size in two, but the muscles that open the mouth are comparatively weak,
and it’s easy to hold the mouth closed. So the guard, scrabbling at Will
Hawkline with its clever tiny hands, whimpered and died, and sounded no
alarm.

Panting and exultant, Will Hawkline came back. “Help me drag this thing
inside.” Well, I helped him. And I thought, how can I tell him, without
making him unhappy, that he had just done the worst possible thing he
could do? Zados don’t make people unhappy. How could I tell him that if
he had let himself be captured, he would have been taken to the
commander on the bridge, where we might be able to do something, but
that now he has killed a guard, the other guards would bite his silly
brave head off? How could I tell him that the most important thing of
all was for the Little John not to be discovered, that he couldn’t now
be detected except if he were seen, and guards looking for their missing
meercath would certainly see him? I couldn’t say it. I couldn’t say it.
He was so smiling and proud.

“Will,” I said, trying so hard to be gentle, “See Jonna there.” And when
he looked I threw the shield around her and she was gone. He gaped and
took a step toward where she had been and I took the shield away. “See
Little John Five.” And I threw the shield around Five and then removed
it and put it around Will Hawkline. “Will,” I said, “you can see Jonna.
You can see me. You can see Five. But they can’t see you. Is that right,
Jonna? Five?” They nodded their heads and I took down the shield.

“Why are you talking to me as if I were a child?” Will Hawkline asked,
so maybe my gentling did not work as well as I thought it would.

I said, “We are going to use the shield. And I want you to understand
that no matter how close you come to anyone, _they can’t see you_. No
matter how much you want to attack one of them, you must not. We are
going out there and find a search party searching, and we are going to
put Little John Five into some place they have just searched, because he
has work to do and they can’t detect him anymore. And then the three of
us are going to the bridge where the commander is, and we are going to
do it without getting our legs torn off and our heads bitten by them. Do
you understand?”

“You’re still talking to me as if I were a child,” said Will Hawkline.

“Well,” I said, “I love children. Let’s go.”

I opened the door and put up a shield big enough for all of us. We could
see no meercaths but we could hear sounds to the left, snuffling and
stamping. I waved them to follow (we could see each other inside the
shield) and we went that way. Sure enough there was a squad of meercaths
right around the corner, opening and closing doors. We stayed close to
the wall and moved right down on them, and I don’t think the three
Earthers really and truly believed in the shield until this moment. One
by one the meercaths passed us as we stepped quietly out of their way,
until they were gone.

I opened a door. “In you go, Five. Tell me when it’s all done.”

He smiled. This was the first time I ever saw a Little John smile. “I
will,” he said and closed the door.

The Little John had given me the cruiser’s own computer picture of the
big jug, and I had it well in my head. It was huge and a lot more
complicated than it had to be, and it was full of machines and
inventions and ups and throughs. And meercaths.

The bridge was way down in the middle of the cruiser with layers and
layers of shells within shells all around it that could be sealed off,
one from another, in case the big dark cruiser was damaged in space. The
bridge was a sort of metal cave all studded with the pictures given it
by the computer—pictures from the see-outs, the feel-outs, the
how-fasts, how-soons, where-are-we’s, and so on—and big ugly meercaths
watching them. On a high place in the middle stood the commander, a
special meercath, extra big.

Invisible under the shield, we stepped past the guard at the bottom of
the ramp up to the high place, and went and stood behind the commander.
We watched for a while, how he did the things a commander does to make a
cruiser go. Mostly it was sticking out the tummy and looking fierce at
one after another of the meercaths who were actually doing something.

From the compartment deep inside the cruiser where we had hidden him,
Little John Five mindspoke me: _“I’m all finished, Althair.”_ It was a
very weary mindspeak.

So I took the shield off Will Hawkline and Jonna Verret. But I kept
mine.

You know, it seemed like forever that they stood there in plain sight,
not knowing that they could be seen, while the commander strutted back
and forth, not knowing they were there. Then one of the meercaths
tending the little lights glanced up at the command post, froze for a
second, and slowly stood up off his tail. (Meercaths sit on their
tails.) Then another glanced, stared, and rose, and another. They began
a funny little murmur among them, as if they were afraid to say anything
to the commander.

And oh, it seemed like such a long while before the commander thought to
look behind him, and there were Will Hawkline and Jonna Verret looking
him in the eye and smiling, quite used by now to being invisible, and
not knowing they were not.

The commander’s huge mouth slowly came open, and slowly he raised his
little right hand, and he pointed a claw at Jonna. He said, in Earth
talk: “You! You! You’re the one who disappeared!” And only then did she
realize she could be seen. “Althair! Althair!” she cried, but I didn’t
say anything. Will Hawkline sidled in front of her, maybe thinking he
was still invisible, maybe thinking he could protect her or attack the
commander, maybe both; but the commander made it clear he could see him
too. His pointing claw swung toward Will Hawkline. “You! I saw your
picture from Earth. The Time Center … you’re the Coordinator. You’re
Will Hawkline!” He whirled around and yelled, “This is what we want! He
has the back-time invention in his head! Detonate the planet! Destroy
Earth!”

“Oh … Althair!” Jonna’s soft hurt cry was the last thing I heard as the
cruiser hung over Earth and a meercath slammed his hand down on the
planet-smashing control.

There was a spiraling whirl and a blink of black, and a staggering,
sickening feeling like traveling in zero time.

It _was_ traveling in zero time.

And the terrible lightnings stroked out from the cruiser, red from this
side, blue from that, green from below and a terrible yellow from above,
and they met in a river of coruscating white as they plunged into the
heart of the planet below, cracked it, kindled it, scorched and exploded
it and turned it into a furious little star.

And the planet was Orel, and with it went the Mindpod, whoever they
were, and never again would they move through the worlds, taking and
killing.

But oh! my pups, my pammies: Oh! I stood with the Earth people and felt
drowned in color and I couldn’t breathe for shock and sorrow. Yes, the
Mindpod was gone, and no, they would no longer menace us, or Earth, or
anyone else: but oh, Orel and its little animals, its brave grass and
the swirls and swarms of life in its seas; any hope it might have to
evolve and grow, gone, gone forever from the universe. Oh yes, there are
lots more worlds and lots more life, but sometimes, when you have done a
good thing, you have to look at all of the good thing, and wonder
forever if there couldn’t have been a better way, a way wherein nothing
died.

We watched the death of Orel, all of Orel, layer after layer boiling and
swirling; lava, explosions of gas, torn mountains, insane winds and
oceans flowing into space. Never mind the Mindpod; never mind the
meercaths; I cried for a world and all the life on that world, which can
never be known again except in memory.

Meercaths … what of the meercaths? If I found myself heart-torn and
shaking at the sight, what of the meercaths who had to watch their own
home dying like that?

I looked around, and … and … and an incredible something else happened.
With the death of the Mindpod, all of the meercaths in the cruiser
disappeared. For each there was a little _pop!_ of vacuum as they ceased
to exist, and we understood at last that each was a projection, a solid
projection, of a real meercath on the planet; and when they were gone,
the projections were gone too.

I mindspoke: “Thank you, Little John Five.” And the answer came back,
“Can I sleep now?”

“Sleep, my friend.”

I dropped the shield. They looked at me, Jonna and Will, as if they did
not know what to say to me.

I said, “I know I gave you a bad time for a while. I needed to get you
to the bridge without your getting killed on the way; I needed to have
the commander see you and think he had you captured; it was the one
thing which would make him smash the planet, and do it before he could
find out what Little John Five had done.”

“Five! Where is Five? What did he do?”

“Something neither you nor I could have done. All the orders on a big
jug like this come through the computer. The commander’s orders were
meant to be: _Detonate the planet. Return to Orel_. Little John Five
thought himself into the computer and made the orders go: _Return to
Orel. Detonate the planet.…_ He’s asleep, down there where we left him.
Let him sleep. He’s already set your course for Earth. Just touch that
little light over there—yes, the green one—and off you’ll go. But don’t
forget to message ahead. Earth may smash this cruiser the moment they
detect it.”

“Will you come with us?”

“Oh my no,” I said. “I have something to do at home. Will,” I said
suddenly, because I couldn’t help myself, “You learned
acceptance … almost … try learning it the rest of the way. Take your
time. The little green light will wait.”

They stood looking into each other’s eyes for a long while, and I could
see it happening: first his acceptance of what she felt, and the
beginnings of his acceptance of what he felt. I called on the mindnet
and went home. I had a story to tell.

He was sleek and he was furry; he was totally amphibious, and Althair
the Adventurer was what he really was. However, he was known on his
lovely planet Ceer, as Althair the Storyteller just because he did that
better—better even than adventuring.

Story time was over. Slithering lithe, surfing, sliding, inchworming,
cracklywhiskered, beady-bright, soft and smooth and shining, went the
young, back to the ocean, back to sleepy-couches in the living
living-places. I’ll be Althair! they would play tomorrow: I’ll be Jonna,
I’ll be Will. This is myth aborning, this, what myth is for.



THE COUNTRY OF AFTERWARD


“Those bastards,” said Mr. Michaelmas, “will knuckle under or so help
me, I’ll have their goddamn plant burned down to the ground.”

Joe Flagg looked nervously across the big boardroom, where the
opposition was huddled around their accountant.

“They’ll hear us,” he cautioned unnecessarily; there were chances a man
like Michaelmas just wouldn’t take. Then: “Why be so hard-nosed, Mike?
We can carry them for a long time with the stock we already hold and
never feel it … at least until they get their new line out. They have a
hell of a process there.”

“I told you, don’t call me Mike. Hell of a process, yes, and they’re
using it for what? Museum reproductions, for God’s sake! They will
release that stock, they will give us control, we will shut them down,
we will take that process, and we will make toilet seats. That is the
way it will go, Mister Flagg, and if it doesn’t, we will blow them
away.”

At his own peril, Joe Flagg ignored the “Mister”—a danger signal.
“You’re costing a lot of good people a lot of jobs, you know.”

Mr. Michaelmas took a gold key out of his business pocket. “I’m going to
take a piss, Flagg. Hold onto the thought that while I’m in there I am
pissing on your bleeding heart.” Teeth closing on his lower lip, Joe
Flagg watched the Chairman of the Board head for his personal private
restroom.

Mr. Michaelmas always enjoyed the effect of the self-closing door of his
restroom—silent, solid, certain, with the pulse of pressure in his
eardrums accompanying the discrete click of the latch. It suited his
taste for impregnability, just as it suited him to churn up as many
noisy suds as he cared to with the conviction that nothing could be
heard outside.

These very suds utterly concealed the faint whisper of a shower curtain,
so that his first knowledge that he was not alone came when a
velvet-cool hand slipped up between his legs and enclosed his penis, and
a cool, velvet voice said, “Nice. Very nice.”

Mr. Michaelmas stood transfixed for moment, watching a blaze of shock
behind his eyes. The moment lasted long enough for two fondles and a
squeeze from the little hand before he could turn around.

As he turned, she rose from her one knee and stood against him smiling—a
long-eyed girl with a fine fall of hair.

He gasped, _“Who the hell are you?”_

“Apricot,” she said; and her skin was peach, and she wore a yellow
dress, but indeed her hair was apricot. She slid a hand up and around to
the nape of his neck, and so great was the shock that he hardly felt the
tiny scratch there; and she flung both arms tight around him and held
him with his arms trapped against the sides. He tried to inhale to
shout, but she anticipated him with a powerful squeeze, so that all that
came out was a hoarse “What the hell is this?”

She tipped her head back so he could see her smiling face. “This is a
kidnapping, Mr. Michaelmas.” He tried to struggle, whimpering, and found
to his horror that his efforts were noticeably weaker. He began to feel
the scratch on the back of his neck, and from it, increasing waves of
nausea and weakness, matching his pounding pulse. With an enchanting
quirk at one corner of her mouth, Apricot said, “You are about to
experience two perfect snatches, Mr. Michaelmas: yours, and mine.”

She swung him around like an oversized doll, propped him against the
wall and confidently released him. Holding his sagging body upright with
one firm elbow in his solar plexus, she produced a plastic glove from
her cleavage and worked it over her left hand. With this she reached
over his head and turned the T-handle of the window latch.

The heavy steel-framed window, hinged at the top, swung open a little;
she caught it and drew toward her, and immediately two leather loops
fell into the room and dangled. On one of these hung a broad leather
belt. This she removed and draped over her shoulder. She put one of Mr.
Michaelmas’s now flaccid arms through a leather loop, then the other.
Then she passed the belt behind him and cinched it tight around his body
and upper arms. She gave two sharp tugs to one of the loops, and Mr.
Michaelmas instantly began to rise. Apricot with one hand considerately
held the window wide as he passed up through it. With her other hand,
and with equal consideration, she zipped up his fly as it went by.

In a moment one of the leather slings fell back into the room. Apricot
took a turn around her left wrist and let herself be drawn up and out
through the window, which she lofted with her foot as she emerged. It
swung up and then down, latching with the same solid click as that which
Mr. Michaelmas had so much admired.

In a strange place a concentric Mr. Michaelmas was afloat.

The licking began almost immediately. It was part of everything,
underlay everything; it was the ambience of being there asleep and awake
(as much awake as he was permitted, at first, to be). A long froth of
gold across his chest and stomach. A soft rope of brown, a sentient halo
of auburn, and again the gold, again the brown, and from time to time
the apricot. How count the hours of a dream—and why?

Murmurs, in and out. “Load him with the C—six thousand or better. Time
release.” “Twelve patches should cover the spectrum for now.” “It’s a
good one. How can a man let himself dry up like that? Erectile response
not twenty percent of norm!” “Blood sugar too low. Blood pressure too
high. No wonder.” “Increased niacin 20 migs twice a day until you get a
rush. Talk about deficiency …!”

Hours and hours, asleep and a little awake, the licking went on. It felt
good.

Visuals. In a dream one could ignore bare breasts and soft female
laughter and a sense of caring in mysterious utterances like “Up the E
four hundred IU and pack in that ginseng.” The frequent tender face
framed in apricot, cool hand on stubbled cheek. Bright attentive eyes,
close and closer, sometimes brown, often green, huge finally and lost in
a presbyotic haze as they fall half-hooded and become tactile instead of
visual: soft lips against his lips, smooth cheek against his growing
stubble.

Growing stubble. How long? Who knows? Who cares! Oh, but it feels good.…

Murmur murmur. “Wasserman neg. Gonococci neg. Anaphylaxis neg, except
guess what? He’s mildly allergic to horses.” “So guess what? We’re fresh
out of horses around here.” “Did you say ‘horse’ or ‘whores’?” Tickle of
laughter: female, four, five.

Head lifted and cradled; woman-smell. Thick warm soup, delicious,
overtone of something … medicine? Thiamine? She wiped his lips with a
nipple.…

Night. The sleep had been different somehow; unforced. There was a long,
soft body beside him in the bed. Over them in a warm room, only a sheet.
Soft fingers holding his genitals, gentle, firm, barely pulsating. Cool,
velvet voice calling quietly: “Pam …”

Half awake. Two thirds awake. Sheet drawn aside, a gentle cloud of dark,
soft silk descending on his stomach and chest, and, oh, lips enclosing
the head of his penis while the hand slid downward, a knowing finger
pressing on the firm flesh underneath his scrotum, pressing, pressing,
while the lips and tongue, the tongue, the lips and tongue …

It came up like pain. It wasn’t pain, but it was like that; a flood with
a bead leading it, a seed pushed up through a slender pipe. The lips,
the tongue, sucked and flicked; warm arms slipped tight around him;
other lips surrounded his, and another tongue slipped into his mouth and
battled his. The traveling bead approached, exploded outward, and
Michaelmas uttered a succession of barks, gasping barks, while
coruscations of light sprinkled the inside of his eyes. Then everything
began comfortably to fade. The lips around his penis stilled, held for a
while (thank God they had stopped moving; he could not have borne the
intensity) and slipped away. The arms around him became gentle; the
tongue withdrew from his mouth, though the lips remained on his until
his breath quieted, matched the warm currents of the woman who held him.

His vision cleared. He lay on a broad, firm bed, and the woman beside
him was Apricot. He didn’t have enough tonus left in his drained body to
react or to move. All he could do was speak; all he could say was,
“Where am I?”

“You are in the Country of Afterward. The very best place in all the
world. How do you feel?”

He closed his eyes to consider this, and felt himself rushing so swiftly
into total sleep that he snapped them open again. “Who are you?”

“You remember me. Apricot. And this is Pam. She just made you come.”

“Finally,” said Pam; but she said it kindly, smiling. She patted and
stroked his now shrunken penis affectionately, and then, as if reading
the distress from his mind, drew the sheet over it. She pulled up her
leg, placed one foot on the edge, rested her chin on the knee and smiled
at him. She looked absolutely beautiful. He wrenched his gaze away from
her and found that this made him look directly at Apricot, who had now
withdrawn from him and was propped up on one elbow, her cascade of
extraordinary hair flung back and to the side, not quite covering her
breasts and permitting a firm little nipple to peer through its curtain.
Mr. Michaelmas said, “You! You kidnapped me!”

“That we did,” she assured him cheerfully.

“You’re not to get away with it, you know.”

“Honey” (and it was said as a real endearment), “we _did_ get away with
it.”

“You know what I mean. These days there’s a thousand ways to track you
down and nail you. The instant you demand the money, you’ve lost, don’t
you know that?”

“Demand what money?”

“What else would you be kidnapping people for?”

“You’ll find out,” said Apricot sweetly.

Mr. Michaelmas tried to sit up, but the movement was met immediately by
Apricot’s rolling toward him, her breasts against his chest. Mr.
Michaelmas struggled weakly and uselessly and spit out, “Damn you
bitches, you let me the hell out of—” and was then muzzled, muffled,
silenced by the soft lips surrounding his.

“You know, Ape,” he heard the lovely Pam say, “that’s not the kind of
talk we tolerate in the Country of Afterward.”

Apricot lifted her mouth away from his long enough to say, “you’re
right, Pam,” and came back to him again. He was appalled to find the
sheet withdrawn from his lower body, to feel the soft, dark mist of hair
flung across his belly, to feel Pam’s mouth around his limpness, drawing
him in entire. He twisted away from Apricot, crying, “What are you
doing? What are you doing?”

Holding him close, her voice soft and cool and fond as ever, she told
him: “We’re making you come again.”

“You can’t!”

“Why ever not?”

“I just did!”

“So?”

“I’m fifty-eight years old!” he howled.

“So?”

Exasperated, he fell into a sullen silence. Apricot shifted her weight
and got an arm under her shoulders. She lowered her head to his chest.
“You’d be astonished,” she said conversationally, “how few women know
and appreciate the fact that a man has nipples.” And she began to tongue
them, one and then the other, nip them ever so gently, suck and stroke
them. The sensation was amazing, unnerving, quite unlike anything he had
experienced in all his life before; it was almost pain; it was enough,
for a while to distract his attention from the expert application of
Pam’s mouth down below. Left to its own devices, and temporarily freed
from the attention of his inhibitions, his astonished penis found
itself: too long to be swallowed whole.

His eyes closed, and this time there was no rush to sleep. He tried to
speak, to think, and found both less possible with every breath he drew.
And the breaths came more swiftly and deeper, and he became aware of
something he had forgotten, oh, years ago … or had he only dreamed it?
He couldn’t remember, but it was the knowledge that the woman with him
was feeling his currents, his surges. What little sex he allowed himself
in his later years—before he had given it up altogether—had been his
concern, and not that of the female he happened to be penetrating; but
there’d been a time … hadn’t there? Hadn’t there?… when he took joy,
took pride in the knowledge that he was pleasuring a woman. Now, now,
here and now and real, Apricot was trembling with him, sharing a rising
current with him, breathing as he deeply breathed, her breath now
rustling, now becoming whispered moans.

And Pam, Pam now working hungrily, thirsting, faster and harder; Pam
cried out with a call almost unheard from her busy mouth, but a cry
sending its vibrations into and through him to his incredibly rigid,
incredibly pulsing rod. Absolutely without his command, his pelvis began
thrusting.

_“Now!”_ Apricot gasped, and as if choreographed, Pam withdrew and
Apricot rolled completely on top of him, and he found himself plunged
deep inside her. His thrusting would not stop, and hers matched and met
his strongly; suddenly she reared up, her eyes closed and her mouth in a
vertical oval, and she cried out hoarsely, a sound absolutely unlike any
he had yet heard from her; and his penis was clutched, released and
clutched, clutched again, powerful as a hand, smooth as a predawn lake;
and he peaked, they cried out together, and again, and again, and,
tenderly less, again, and once more, pleasant and light as the briefest
smile, and then a long slide into panting quiet. The cords in his inner
thighs thrummed with reaction; the calves of his leg would have knotted
had they had the strength; even the soles of his feet tingled.

When he was still, Apricot rolled off him, and the withdrawal wakened
him with a gasp. She pulled up a corner of the sheet and wiped the sweat
off his brow and cheeks and, gently, his eyelids; it felt good. “This is
the Country of Afterward, again,” she whispered to him, the echoes of
her own panting still in her voice. “There’s no place here for anger or
meanness or fear. Think about this, and sleep now. Sleep.”

All but a dim night-light went out. Mr. Michaelmas heard: “Night,
Pammy.” And when he turned on his side, he felt Apricot at his back,
fitting shin to calf, knee to knee, an arm around his chest, and the
small strong hand spread there, comforting. He slept.

It must have been hours, for he felt totally rested; yet the room was
the same, the same dim night-light from somewhere. (But how count time
in a dream?—and why?) And there was a new woman in bed with him, larger,
stronger, fuller. Somehow he had reversed positions during his sleep,
and he lay at her back, nested like spoons, with his arm around her, and
his hand up between her breasts. She smelled good.

He was so rested and so comfortable that he forgot for a measureless
instant to be afraid, indignant, even to wonder. He must have made some
small movement, because her hand slipped over his and moved it to cup
her nipple. She sighed and, lying very still, he felt the nipple
increasing in his palm. The fear and indignation and demand were
manifest, down there somewhere, but he would not, for this moment,
permit that to matter. What mattered was lying still and warm and
rested, appreciating this almost motionless movement, the erection of a
nipple in his palm.

With amazement and delight he became aware that his own erection was
matching hers. _I’m fifty-eight years old!_ but: So? And how long had it
been since his last explosion? Surely not very long; but, then, there
was no time in this place, and if it’d been only a short time, too short
time ago to make another one possible, that seemed not to matter any
more than the numbers attached to the years he lived. _So?_…

Mistrusting his own evidence, he felt the urge to reach down and feel
himself to be sure was true; and oh, and oh! it was true. And when she
felt his movement, the woman flung back the covers and spun around,
rising—a beautiful movement that ended with her seated on his groin with
most of her weight carried by her knees, and his penis buried deep
inside her. He looked up at her; she was magnificent rearing up, with a
muscled torso and firm breasts, the nipples standing out proud; she
threw back her head atop its strong column of neck, her teeth gleamed,
and she climaxed immediately. He had never seen or felt anything quite
so marvelous.

There is that in all humans which captures an experience in all its
aspects, sight, sound, sensation, indelibly; and Mr. Michaelmas knew in
this moment he had a memory, a nested jewel in his personal treasure
chest, which would far outlast any tangible thing he had ever owned, and
which, unlike stocks and bonds and country houses (or, for that matter,
a welfare check, should he ever come to that) could never, never be
taken from him.

Three times she moved, up and down; then, throwing her head from side to
side and crying out, she came again, with a series of spastic
contractions so powerful that she ejected his penis, which she quickly
recaptured and then was still, so that he might feel her cascading
aftershocks. She bent forward and locked his eyes with her own, while
her face became smooth, almost flat, and she began to move again. The
smooth, oiled pressure of her vagina increased steadily as she
approached another climax; breathless, almost awed, pinned by the
intensity of those eyes, he felt his own currents rising in response to
hers. Her mouth twisted, her eyes screwed shut, back went her head, and
she howled and she came, _and so did he_, oh, and so did he!

Gasping, she slid her knees down and out from under her and fell weakly
on top of him, driving the wind out of his laboring lungs, rolled to the
side against him, panting and smiling and sharing his breath.

It was hardly a conscious movement, but he put an arm around her, and
she shifted until their bodies fit and they quieted together, reading
each other’s eyes in the dimness. He could feel the thud of her heart.
In time they slipped unmoving into a quiet space, not sleeping, not
awake either: just being.

After time (in this place where there was no time) she sighed and sat
up. She hit a switch somewhere, and an oval of light etched itself on
the bed from a floor lamp nearby. “Look,” she said. “Look at this.” She
raised herself with her legs wide apart and the light flooding down on
her crotch. “Did you ever really look at one of these?”

He never had; never, certainly, on a black woman before. The hair was
thick and blue-black and, in the center, divided on an area of a red
quite surprising in its intensity. She began to speak, her strong
slender fingers moving from time to time in demonstration. Her voice was
full and rich, and her diction faultless.

She said: “This is the beginning; this is where it all starts—life and
joy and all the things that come from both of them. Look at it; look
here: I read of a little girl who saw a picture of it and said ‘Oh, it’s
just like a flower!’ and indeed it is; see the petals here and there?
See how it folds into itself?

“See the wetness, yours and mine together. I honor the wetnesses of the
body, especially when they come from loving, and most especially when
they’re mingled. Your sweat is drying on me, and mine on you, and I
think that is just beautiful.

“Look. Look. Look at the shape of it. Forget for a moment what it is,
and just draw in your mind the shape of it. Do you see there the shape
of the arch, the Gothic arch you’ll find in the great old cathedrals? Do
you recall how many of them surmount and surround those gorgeous round
rose windows, exploding with all the colors there are, and with all the
light God and man can pour through them, each in his turn? If you think
for a moment, man, that I’m irreverent when I make this comparison, or
that I’m out to destroy worship and holiness, you’ve got me all wrong. I
believe with all my heart that God made us as He would have us be, and
that when we make joy with what He gave us, we praise Him for His good
works. I think the idea of such praise began long before there was a
church, any church, and that this special joy and the act of worship
were once the same thing, and that they were driven apart by dried-up
old men who had lost the joy and found a way to substitute power for
it—earthly power, not heavenly power.

“Look! You are looking at the gates to heaven, not the gates to hell!
You are looking at an altar, man, at which you can worship a woman and
through her Woman with a capital letter: all life and all joy.

“Then if you can learn to think of all this in this special way, go
outside a cathedral and look up, and if you can’t see the symbolism of
those strong stretching columns and towers and steeples reaching toward
God, then I do indeed pity you.

“When a man gets horny and needs his ashes hauled and drives in here and
dumps them, he commits a sacrilege. When a man stabs in here with a
rape, he violates the intention of God who made him. When he comes to it
with joy and reverence, he worships. And if he comes to it with
love—man, he has it all.”

“I never …” Mr. Michaelmas started to say, but it wouldn’t come out as
words; it was a speechless mumble. He went his lips and tried again.
“I’ve never heard anyone talk like that.” He lay relaxed, looking at the
curves and petals in their oval of light.

The overhead lights came on, not at all harshly, and the woman’s hand
descended on his shoulder, carrying the clear message: _You needn’t
move;_ not _Don’t_—just _You needn’t_, a message so clear and strong
that he did not even start, even when Apricot’s clear, cool voice said,
“Let’s eat!”

He glanced up. Apricot and the dark-haired girl Pam were pushing a
wheeled table toward the bed. They were both naked and completely at
peace in their nudity. Apricot moved around in front of the table (from
which fragrances animated that made his salivaries squirt).

“Let’s eat.”

He sat up, and he was ravenous. Fluffy yellow omelets, stuffed with
mushrooms and with an incredible orange sauce; a pyramid of filet mignon
in little cubes, quite raw, and tender as a serenade; a dark bread,
obviously homemade with an elusive smoky overflavor; four kinds of
cheese, passion fruit and (of course) apricot nectars, a green tea and a
wonderful black coffee. “Lord! You can cook!”

“We didn’t do this one; it was Rorie. She’ll be along any minute.”

“Rorie. She’s the one with the ah—”

“The fuzzhead. That’s right. And your latest conquest there is Rietta.
She is our resident God-freak.”

To his surprise, Mr. Michaelmas felt mildly defensive.

“I don’t think she’s any kind of freak.”

“Well, bless your thing,” cried Rietta, and kissed his ear.

Mr. Michaelmas felt himself flushing with pleasure. He was amazed.

Rorie, the one with the halo of pale, fine hair, appeared, a girl so
perfectly proportioned and so graceful in her carriage and movements
that it was easy to notice, last of all, that she was over six feet
tall.

“Mr. Michaelmas says, if you could marry, he’d cook you,” said Pam.

“Well, thank you,” said Rorie graciously, and sat on the edge of the big
bed, looking at him with frank and open liking.

They ate companionably and, without being fussy about it, they all saw
that Mr. Michaelmas had everything he wanted a second or two before he
knew he wanted it, while good talk rolled and swirled around the group.
He learned that Pam was a registered nurse with a degree in
biochemistry, Rietta (“It used to be Henrietta, but women’s lib got that
far into my name. A hen I ain’t.”) had an M.D. and that Rorie—Aurora—was
a pharmacist.

“I’m a high school dropout,” said Apricot, “with a libido I insist is
normal and maybe a little more _chutzpah_ than most. I rounded up these
three in the same hospital.”

“It was a veterans’ hospital,” said Rietta. “Apricot blew in one day to
visit her girlfriend’s boyfriend who lost an argument with a grenade.”

“He was a double amputee with half a face,” said Apricot, “and nobody
was lining up on both sides of the street, cheering like they did when
he marched off to war. Hardly anybody ever drops in to chat with those
guys, and when they do, they take care of their brains or the boredom or
their immortal souls, but they pay damn little attention to their
gonads. A lot of them, there’s nothing wrong with their gonads. So,
well,” she shrugged, “I did something about it.”

“Did she ever,” said Rorie admiringly. “She recruited a whole detachment
of us. Next thing you know there were flying squads of us visiting
hospitals all over.”

“You mean they—you …” Four nodding heads answered him. “What about the
administration?”

“We’re not stupid,” said Rietta, “and don’t forget—we know the rules.
Mostly, administration didn’t know what was going on, which is SOP for
administration everywhere. Once in awhile there was a ripple, but we
found most of ’em willing to look the other way as long as we could
assure them that they wouldn’t have to take any heat. It worked
beautifully right up until—”

“Never mind the details,” Apricot said quickly, and then laughed. “Let’s
just say we ran up against a front-office type with a small mind and
desiccated scrotum who apparently felt that decency, morality and
frustration was the proper environment for his veterans. We saw it
coming and quietly removed him. We gave him a full treatment and put him
back where we found him, and to this day he’s got as happy a population
as you can find any hospital—which is never very.

“Our first case,” said Aurora, smiling reminiscently.

_Case? Am I a “case”?_ Mr. Michaelmas looked around him at the four
relaxed, pleasantly smiling woman, and past them at the room.

Timeless. Large, carpeted in neutral gray with a warm blush to it, and
the walls were draped—all of them. No sign of windows; there must have
been doors, because the women came and went, but from where he sat on
the huge square bed, there was no way of telling where a door might have
been. None of the girls wore watches; the light was artificial; there
was no radio, no TV.

Timeless.

Abruptly, he demanded, “How long have I been here?”

Pam looked at him searchingly. Rorie uncrossed her long legs. Apricot
looked across him at Rietta and asked, “How long would you say?”

Rietta looked pensively at the ceiling for a moment. “Fifty, fifty-five
minutes maybe.”

Mr. Michaelmas looked at each in turn, and got smiles. “I don’t know
what you mean,” he said levelly.

“I mean fifty-five minutes or so in the Country of Afterward,” said
Rietta. “Nothing else matters here.”

“Well, goddammit, it matters to me!”

“I really don’t like that kind of talk,” said Rietta. Clearly, she meant
it. “I guess he’s out.”

“Seem so,” said Rorie, rising like a swift flower in stop-motion; and
the next thing Mr. Michaelmas knew he was hit in four complex ways from
four directions, and sank under a choreographed tangle of soft, strong,
skilled limbs and torsos.

In the next timeless time, two things utterly astonished Mr. Michaelmas.
The first was that after a few minutes of intense battle, _he laughed_.
Mr. Michaelmas laughed! A great peal of unexpected, uncontrollable
laughter, coming from a place where no real laughter had lived for
years!

The other thing was that, one way or another, he brought off all four
women. The ways, and the other ways, cascaded over him, presented
themselves, demanded themselves, created their own hungers and urgent
demands.

Then his own incredible peak and eruption flung him away into sleep.

He woke alone and, realizing it, felt a vague sense of pique, of
abandonment. He moved, and was aware of the warmth of the bed beside
him, and understood that he hadn’t been alone after all; he probably
awakened because she had silently slipped away. (She? Which she?) Now he
came all the way awake and sat up. He was more alert than he had yet
been, here—almost normally so. To be awake, and alone, was something of
a novelty in this cave of novelties.

He slipped off the bed and fell pleasure as his bare feet took his
weight. The carpeting was resilient, crisply but pleasantly tickling. He
moved silently to the draped wall and put his hand against it, pressed,
felt nothing back of it but a solid surface. He paused, then, hand over
hand, he felt his way all around the room; there had to be an opening,
an door, somewhere. And, of course, he found one.

The bathroom.

The light came on automatically as he passed through the just
overlapping drape. Not quite angry, not quite laughing at himself, and
commanded by his bladder more than by his brain, he used the bathroom
“now that I’m here.” And as he emerged, “Wouldn’t you know …” he said
ruefully, for there on the edge of the bed sat the long limbed Aurora,
wheeled table alongside, pouring coffee. Not for the first time he was
struck by her beauty: how could anyone so tall be so perfect? The cup,
the saucer, the coffee pot seemed like doll furniture in her long,
tapered hands. And she smiled at him, set down the coffee, and rose to
meet him halfway, put her arms around him, pressed him to her wonderful
body, held him, released him. “I’m glad you’re still here,” she said.

“Where else would I be?”

“Wherever it is you go when you leave—”

“I know, I know. ‘The Country of Afterward.’ When are you going to give
me a straight answer about that?” And he felt a flick of astonishment at
hearing himself, for though the words were those of the crabby and testy
Michaelmas, the tone was, for him, something new. The cutting edge
wasn’t there. Rorie captured his eyes with hers for a moment; her face
flicked from profound seriousness to a radiant smile, as if she had
found something she hoped for. “That’s exactly why I came in just now—to
give you answers. Come sit by me.”

They perched together on the edge of the huge bed. The table was a vase,
the food a bouquet: yellow rice, tiny green peas, scarlet pimentos,
orange-pink lobster meat, blue-black mussels, white chicken,
mother-of-pearl inside the just-burst, juicy clams.

“I’ll tell you a story,” said Rorie, around and between her food. “Maybe
you’ve read it, maybe you know it, but let me tell you anyway, because I
have a point to make.

“It’s in Victor Hugo’s big novel _Les Miserables_, and is one of the
finest pieces of writing anywhere in this world. It deals with a sailing
ship, a French naval vessel and a terrible storm. The ship had a weather
deck, and right under it the gun deck where the cannons were kept. They
were tied down behind the gun ports, ready to be run out and used in
battle. Big brass cannons, you know, on wheels.

“Well, in the storm one of the cannons got loose, and I’m sorry I don’t
have the book with me to read you that part; you’d never forget it;
you’d think you’d been there. As the ship rolled and plunged in the
storm, the cannon was like something alive and crazy, charging up and
down across, smashing into the bulkheads, splitting the timbers of the
ship’s sides, bearing down on crewmen trying to find some way to stop
it. It began to look as if that berserk cannon was going to sink the
ship and kill everybody.

“Then a young gunnery officer snatched up a long ramrod and ran out to
the middle of the gun deck. He was like a dancer, a matador, a
prizefighter all at once; and he dodged, and he spun, and he ducked this
crazy cannon as it ran at him until he saw his chance, and then he dove
under it and shoved the ramrod into the wheel spokes, stopping the thing
in its tracks until the crew could get ropes on it and tie it down.

“Want some more lobster?”

Mr. Michaelmas, munching and agog at the thrum of her voice, shook his
head.

She went on:

“Late the next day when the sea was calm, the captain called up the
whole crew on the main deck. He and his officers were in full dress. He
had the gunnery officer, front and center, and he came down with a metal
on a chain, and he decorated the officer and kissed him on both cheeks,
the way they do in the French military to this day.

“Then he went back up on the high poop deck and called down a question,
‘Now which man is responsible for that cannon getting loose?’

“And the hero with the shiny decoration on his chest, proud and honest,
answered, ‘I was, sir.’

“Then the captain called up the sergeant of marines. ‘Sergeant,’ he
said, ‘take that man, and a squad, up to the foredeck and shoot him.’

“And they did.”

Mr. Michaelmas took a while to realize he had stopped chewing. This lady
really knew how to tell a story.

“That’s one part of what I have to tell you,” Aurora said. “Push it
aside—” (she pushed his plate aside as she said this, and replaced it
with a dessert, a whipped and shaped mound of something with real flower
petals in it) “—and let me give you another part. They’ll all come
together. You’ll see.”

He started to respond, then gave it up. He was beginning to learn
(relearn?) that things could happen without his having to make them
happen.

The tall girl lay down and rolled over on her stomach, and propped
herself up on her elbows. “That Apricot,” she said finally, “she’s
crazy, you know, but she’s also some kind of saint. And she—well, she
just doesn’t think like other people. The veteran’s hospital bit was
only the beginning. Want some more coffee?”

“I’ll get it,” said Mr. Michaelmas. “Go on.”

“She read an article in an old magazine one day. It was a very funny
bit, written during one of America’s so-called ‘police actions’ against
Communists. This writer had gotten hold of a newspaper story about how
much money it cost to kill one of the enemy. He multiplied this by the
total body count to date, and came out with a huge figure, which he said
would be enough to buy a villa on the Riviera for every family of five
in the entire enemy country. He said this would do two things: it would
stop the killing, and would knock the hell out of communism.”

They laughed together. Aurora said, “That’s funny, and it’s sharp, but
it set Apricot to thinking: Here was an alternative to war, ridiculous
as it was. She’d never wondered before if there could be
alternatives—who does?

“And that led her to wonder how it was, if there were alternatives, the
final choice always seemed to be mass killing. What bothered her most
was that in a war a country always screens out the strongest, the
quickest, the smartest young men that can be found and sends them out to
get their heads blown off.

“And she thought, who makes these decisions? Almost always, old men.
‘Old’ didn’t have to mean years; ‘old’ means with all the juices dried
up. ‘Old’ means (whether or not they know themselves) that they hate the
young just for being young; they are jealous, envious and angry. It’s
nothing new, you know. The old bulls are always afraid of the young ones
coming up. This kind of thing was around before humanity was out of the
trees.

“Now here is crazy Apricot deciding to do something about it. If the old
ones are sitting safe in front of their acres of polished mahogany,
sending the young ones to die with a stroke of their ballpoint pen,
then, says Apricot, let’s find a way to put the juice back into them.
Because she believes that a good little man is as good as a good big
man, and a good old man is as good as a good young one. Sometimes
better,” she added, smiling and reaching to stroke Mr. Michaelmas’s
thigh.

“Now,” she said “_you_. Some men collect companies to make
conglomerates. You’ve been collecting conglomerates. I don’t know
why—you certainly don’t need the money, and you’ve proved yourself over
and over; I don’t understand it, and I won’t try. But I won’t fault you
for it. It’s your thing, and it’s what you have to do.

“But in doing it you became a gold-plated bastard. You got so you didn’t
care how many faces you walked on with your climbing cleats on, and then
you got so you enjoyed it. You especially enjoyed crunching young
people, young enterprise, young ideas.”

“Now, just a damn minute—”

Aurora raised a finger, overriding him. “I’m reading from the record,
Mr. Michaelmas. We’ve planned this for you for a long time. And I’m not
saying what you are,” she added. “I’m saying what you’ve been.” She rose
up on the bed and came to him, pressing him back with one hand while the
other sought his groin. “Your juices are running again. You’ve been fed
and rested and tuned up, and you’ve been balled to the point where you
had all the pleasure you can handle and _have started to give it back_.
You know what you did for the four of us. Stiff or limp, fingers, mouth
or whatever, you looked out for us all; you wouldn’t quit until you were
sure.

“And that’s what the Country of Afterward is all about, Mr. Michaelmas.
You take off your clothes to have sex, right? Well, good sex takes off
your gender—do you see what I’m saying? It’s the one time when human
beings have the chance to meet each other without the old chase, without
game-playing and manipulating and tit-grabbing. And it’s the one time
when a lot of people—I’m sorry to say mostly men—roll over and go to
sleep, leaving the other—usually the women—depressed, even crying and
not knowing why.”

Mr. Michaelmas felt very strange. Aurora’s lovely face and brilliant
eyes seemed to be coming into sharper and sharper focus, while the rest
of the room seemed to be fuzzing out. _What’s the matter with me?_

To his astonishment, Aurora put two fingers in her mouth and produced a
short, piercing whistle. Somewhere behind her the drapes billowed, and
they all came in—Rietta, Pam, Apricot. He could not move … and the hand
moving in his groin was exquisite. “Must’ve been something I ate,” he
mumbled.

“Sure it was,” said Aurora. Her face, her eyes, moved closer; her voice
soft and strong, drove into him. “When anybody, young or old, starts
showing the signs of being the kind of bastard you were before you came
here, you remember that you’re the captain. You’re going to find a phone
number in your side jacket pocket (when you have a side jacket pocket).
You’re the captain,” she said again, “and you will call that number, but
you won’t say ‘take that man out and shoot him.’ You will say ‘take that
man out and fuck him.’ And if, when he comes back, he still acts like a
bastard, you will call again and say ‘take him out and fuck him
again’—which, you will agree, is better than having to shoot him again.
Mr. Michaelmas, we are going after bastard captains in government and
industry, and we won’t stop until the juices are flowing again all
through the summit.”

Apricot vaulted lithely to the bed behind him; lifted his head and put
it in her lap. Rietta fitted her strong body to his; Pam flung her dark
silk over his torso and smoothed his chest with her cheek. No one
hurried. Gently, sensation rose without pausing at any plateau, rose and
peaked and gently overflowed, and he fell asleep in the Country of
Afterward.

Midmorning. Autumn. Warm. A laughing wind. Traffic. Voices. Mr.
Michaelmas opened his eyes; whatever it was that had blacked him out
left him with a click. He felt fine, and more alert than he had been in
years. He looked across a small park at the front of his own office
building.

“Jesus Christ! Mr. Michaelmas!”

“Wrong on the first, right on the second. Hello, Joe.”

Joe Flagg dropped down on the bench next to him. “I got your message
that you were out here. Someone phoned. Where were you? I began to think
you were never coming back. Even thought you’d been kidnapped, but
nobody ever—”

“Been minding the store?”

“I’ve done the best I could, Mr. Michaelmas. Well what I did, I tried to
do everything the way you would.”

“Did you, now.”

Flagg began excitedly to recite what he’d done. It went on while they
crossed the park, crossed the street, crossed the lobby: foreclose,
acquire, outbid, outplay. Freeze, force, pull the rug. Variously, men
squealed, ran, turned pale, you should’ve seen his face when I  … By the
time they entered the elevator, Flagg had almost run down. Mr.
Michaelmas interrupted the last punch line of corporate triumph with
“You’ve turned into a gold-plated bastard, Flagg.”

“Thanks. Thanks a lot.”

_Well_, thought Mr. Michaelmas, _he’s had a good teacher_. They entered
his private office from the back corridor; a gamut of astonished staff
was a thing he was not prepared to run. Mr. Michaelmas dropped into his
familiar old chair. The convolutions of the old leather seat did not
exactly fit his buttocks as they had. Well of course: Flagg had been
using it. He looked up at his Number Two Man, who was (a little
nervously) picking up things from the desk: a picture, a file of papers,
a little clock. “Get this stuff out of your way … you want me now?”

“Not now.”

Flagg backed out. _Backed out_. Was he in the presence of royalty, or
did he expect to be shot if he turned around?

Mr. Michaelmas stretched. He felt just fine. He put his hands in his
pockets, found his wallet, keys. A card with a phone number. He dialed.

Two rings. “Afterward.” An answering machine.

He said, “This is Michaelmas. Tell Apricot the gunnery officer is Joseph
Flagg.”

_Clopclick_, and a voice: _this_ was no machine saying excitedly, “Mike!
Oh, Mike, I hoped it was you! This is Apricot.”

He felt, suddenly, like a blushing high-school kid. “Apricot … Apricot,
am I ever going to see you again?”

“You just name it. You really are wonderful, you know.”

“Really?”

“Honest to really, Mike.”

So he made the date. Then he buzzed Flagg.

“Get in here.”

Flagg appeared, his face carefully composed, but his hands holding his
hands very hard.

Mr. Michaelmas detached his gold key from the bunch and slid it across
the desk. “Have one of these made for yourself. And call me Mike.”

He thought Joe Flagg was going to cry. “Yes, sir, Mr. Michaelmas. Thank
you, Mr. Michaelmas.” He backed out.

_Mike_, Mr. Michaelmas told himself, feeling the juices run within him,
_you really are wonderful, you know. Honest to really_. He leaned back
and stretched, feeling the old leather molding again to fit his body,
and fell to thinking about his date, and afterward.



LIKE YESTERDAY


“Privilege,” murmured Perk. “Truly, an honor and a privilege.” He didn’t
know what to do with his hands, so he laid them against his side-seams.
This brought him to parade attention, and the old Chief hadn’t ordered
it, so he set his shine-to-wincing boots slightly apart. The old Chief
hadn’t said “At ease!” either, so he didn’t put the hands behind him. He
didn’t know what a stance like this was. He didn’t altogether know what
he was, or why he was here. “Having the opportunity,” he said after a
while, because the old man was so still, staring, apparently, at his
crotch. He thought a hysterical thought about zippers and controlled the
impulse to check it out with an effort somewhat greater than four hours
on the obstacle track might cost him. “All by myself,” he added
insanely. “I mean, with you, sir, privilege.”

The old Chief looked up at last, giving a whole new meaning to the words
“eye strain.” The cold and deepset eyeballs seemed totally involved in
lifting the enormous wattles which hung beneath them, while the uplifted
face, the whole head, was equally involved with the weight of chins,
which dragged the lower lip away from the lower teeth in the corners of
the mouth wetly, pinkly down. This was the famous and terrifying scowl
so beloved of hating political cartoonists, two generations of them.
There was time for Perk to realize that his crotch, and probably a great
deal more about him, had had no part in that apparently fixed stare. The
old men had merely been mustering the strength to look up. Yet, because
he was the old Chief, nothing was “merely.” He could conquer, he could
devastate by lifting his face. “Shuddup,” he said. “Siddown!” The twitch
of two mottled fingers showed where. Perk was standing, Perk was
sitting; it was like matter-transmission, like changing the angle in a
film cut, without so much as a click between, and he never could recall
the move.

The old Chief turned to face him, not so much his function as that of
his swivel chair. Now that their eyes were on a level, the old Chief’s
had no work to do but to pour out hatred. They did not—at least, Perk
hoped not—but it was there to do, and they were aimed right at him.

At last: “What did you want to be a cop for?”

“Who, me?” Perk answered stupidly, startled. He broke his gaze away;
stupidity seemed able to ignite the hatred. “Well, I, it’s what I’ve
always wanted to be, ever since I.” A quick glance at those old eyes
stopped him short. He hit his knuckles together in chagrin, and was
afraid he was blushing. He was. He said, “To help people. To make it a
better place, the city. To teach folks it’s right to live by the law,
right and easy, and it’s wrong to break the law, long and hard. And
then, to keep teaching people, showing people, all the time every day
what the law _is_.”

“Why don’t you tell the truth?”

“Oh, I, but, I—”

“Never mind that now,” the old man cut him off. “You probably don’t even
know the truth.” He paused, then said with immense weight, “But you
will.… What do you do on your duty tour every day? Oh God,” he blurted,
interrupting before Perk could speak, “I don’t mean you control traffic
when the game breaks up, so the dumbheads don’t kill each other driving
manual between the gates and the radarway. I don’t mean you find a
little girl’s kitten or bring in a case of clap the medics have traced
and nailed for you, or call for a freeze because you think a street
fight could start.”

“Well, that’s police work,” said Perk, a little defensively; then,
“Sir—Chief! What’s the matter? Are you all, shall I—”

“I’m trying to keep from throwing up. You know, you really make me sick.
Don’t take it personal. You don’t know no better, not yet, but what I
hear talk like that my stomach wrenches and I gag.” He made some heavy,
whistling breaths, while Perk debated whether or not to apologize.
_Don’t take it personal_. Well all right. He waited.

“Put it this way. A citizen has a go-round with his chick, splits her
face clear down to the tits with a cleaver. What’s the procedure?”

“Her ID signals the precinct, condition yellow, peak violence, and if
the computer shows vital signs failing, we get condition red. We know
who she is and where she is. We cordon, Stage One, five hundred meters.
We close the cordon. Anything unusual, any resistance, we freeze the
area.”

“Everyone lies down sleepy.”

“Yes, sir. Then we move to the scene and enter.”

“No warrant.”

“_Hightower vs. Dayton, Ohio_, 2019, Supreme Court. ID notification of
the precinct constitutes a warrant for search.”

“Did your homework, huh. What next?”

“On entering, and discovering evidence of assault, which we always do,
we use the police key on the mobe.”

“You know why it’s called the mobe?”

“Yes, sir. From Möbius, 19th-century German mathematician, who devised
the moebius strip. The mobe is a scanner which is installed, as many as
necessary, to cover all enclosures, public and private, and most
thoroughfares. It records and retains audio and video for twelve hours
before it recycles. The police key stops and opens it for the record of
events leading up to the crime, for use in court.”

“What about the Fifth Amendment—self-incrimination? Right of privacy,
all that?”

“Completely protected, sir, _Arkwright vs. Thorndale, Miss._, 2022.
Surveillance after the fact, even of events before the fact, takes on
the nature of detective investigation.”

“All right, all right. So what about your murderer?”

“With his picture and voice-prints, we have identification. If we’ve
frozen the area, he’ll be in it somewhere. If not we’ll pick him up the
minute he uses his ID to make a purchase, or says a single word in a
public or private place. As a fugitive he has no civil rights, and the
warrant to search for him is valid wherever the computer locates him.”

“All right, no more, I’m going to throw up for sure. So. Radar keeps the
cars apart, the freeze and the mobe gets your murderers, molesters,
vandals, and thieves, and you—when you’re not directing traffic in the
parking lot at the ballpark, or finding the little lost dogs—you trot
down trails the goddam computer marks out for you. And that’s police
work. Why did you want to be a cop?” He shouted it.

Startled, Perk shouted back, “I told you!” Then to those eyes, he added,
“Sir.” Then, to more of the same, he murmured, “Well, gosh, I thought I
did.”

“Then tell me this. Do they like you?”

“Who—you mean civilians? People? Well, sure. I mean, I guess so. I mean,
why shouldn’t they? We help them.” He looked up quickly at that cliff of
jowls, and away.

“So you joined the cops so people would like you.”

“No! No, I mean, that isn’t it at all. I just wanted to help!”

With a dreadfully slow, terrifying landslide sort of flow, the old man
leaned forward until his elbows reached his knees and the full weight of
his great torso came to rest on them. “You are going to be the chief of
police here—chief of police in the biggest city in the whole country.”

“Me?” Years later, and for all those years, Perk was to cringe at his
memory of that moment, and each time he was to wish he had the moment to
live over again, for he _squeaked_. “Me?”

“You qualify, down the line. You’re the first man I’ve seen who does.
All the years I served, and ever since I retired thirty-four years ago
in the year 2000, and mind you, retired or not, I never took my eyes off
the force and what’s been happening to it, I’ve been looking for that
one man to be the kind of chief I was, yeah, and better.”

“Oh no, sir—no! Never that!” Perk was genuinely scandalized.

“Don’t you ‘no’ me, you limp little dick!”

“I’m sorry, sir, I didn’t mean … I mean, I’d like that, more than
anything in the world I would, but it’s so—so big that I’ve got to be
honest. I’m not the best there is. On my last competence survey I scored
eighty-seventh. The time before that I scored forty-sixth. If my next
one shows a continued downturn, I’ll think about resigning.”

“You’ll do no such a damn thing. I’ve been looking for you for fifty
years and I ain’t got another fifty, let’s not kid ourselves. I’m
shootin’ my wad with you, and you’re goin’ out of this room today on
your way to the top. You’re goin’ to give this city the kind of police
it used to have, if you have to personally make this city what it used
to be. Hear?”

“Y-yes sir.”

“Okay. Lesson one is why you, and 99 dot four-9s percent of the police
wanted on the force, an’ what I tell you you will never and I mean by
God never, repeat to anybody, most especially a cop. Do you really
understand that?”

“Yessir,” but it was inaudible. Perk when his lips and tried again.
“Yessir.”

The old Chief heaved himself upright and folded his forearms, which was
as far as his arms would fold. Out of their caves, the eyes trained
downrange like artillery. “From time to time it comes to a man that he
wants to straighten other people out, that he was put on the world for
that—to see to it that other people toe the mark, and toe it because
this man said so. Now a very small handful of them could do it all by
themselves, because there was a certain something about them that made
folks listen, made folks move.”

“Charisma,” Perk murmured.

“Shut up, I’m talkin’. Mohammed, Marx, Hitler, Gandhi, Jesus, FDR, that
feller over there in Hungary I can never say his name right ten, twelve
years back. You’re the schoolboy, you know the ones I mean. They could
do it and they did, but that thing they had, it comes to one out of
dozens of millions. All the rest of it, the wanting to straighten other
people out, there’s thousands of them born with that. But when they try
to move people like Hitler and Jesus and them, they just get laughed at.
So what do they do? They join the police force. Not the Army, the
Navy—those guys can to straighten out only other Army and Navy guys. The
police, they get to straighten out everybody.” The old Chief raised a
heavy forefinger and marked time with his words. “An application to try
for the force is an open admission that a man hasn’t got the muscle to
do what he wants to do, by himself. His uniform says to the world that
he isn’t complete, that he’s some sort of amputee. His club and a side
arm and his badge are the muscles he admits he does not have. You got to
know that about yourself and about every man and woman from rookie to
chief—away down deep they feel impotent and mad that they can’t
straighten people out with their own muscle.

“Guys who really want to help—” (he made the word scathing with mimicry)
“—wind up in the fire department.” He spat on the carpet.

“If you know that about the force, and if you’re the only one who does,
you got a handle on them. You know who to order into what action, you
know who has the most to prove and needs to prove it the most. That’s
how you make your appointments and promotions, and that’s all you need
to handle things inside. But that’s not enough to bring the force back
to what it should be.

“What you got to do—and I’m telling you, you are the one that is going
to do it—you got to forget if people, I mean that ocean of dumb-dumbs
out there, if they like you or not. Respect you, sure, admire you, sure,
but if they all like you, you failed, you’ve lost the chance to bring
back the kind of power we had when there was such a thing as money, I
mean the kind you counted out and passed around from hand to hand, and
before the IDs with their bio-sensors, and the mobe, and the freeze, and
like that. Can’t you see what’s wrong? _Nobody’s afraid of you anymore!_
Time was when a highway patrolman stopped the car for a soft tire or
failing to signal a lane change—this was before the radar waves—the guy
in the car would pull out a gun and blow the cop’s head off. And it got
so when the guy was stopped on a highway and reached into his pocket for
his chewing gum because he was nervous, the cop would blow his head off.
Nobody likes to see cops killed, or even civilians, but back then there
was always fear, back and forth; people were scared of the cops, the
cops were scared of the people. Only, because of that thing I told you
about, that kind of amputation, it made the cops tough and mean because
it gave them something special to prove. So in those days, sure, cops
would find little girl’s lost puppy-dogs and all, and when someone
you’re afraid of does the like of that, they are special, boy, special,
and they knew it. And that’s what we’re going to bring back. What you
are going to bring back. Volstead. That mean anything to you?”

Perk had to shake himself. The old man had perhaps more of that thing he
claimed was amputated, that charisma, than he realized. “Volstead. The
Volstead Act. Eighteenth amendment. It was against the law to
manufacture, sell or transport alcoholic beverages.”

“Oh, you are the little schoolboy,” sneered the old man, but wasn’t
there a touch of admiration in it? “It was a dumb law—the dumbest part
was getting it into the Constitution, because it made everybody who
boozed a federal criminal, and when you have millions of people
violating one part of the Constitution you can’t expect them to take the
rest of the real serious. Aside from that it was great. For the first
time it gave the law the chance to infiltrate and raid and hire
informers and make and take payoffs—move in on the citizens. Sure, the
citizens fought back in a lot of ways, from apathy to gun-fighting, but
it gave the cops more reach than they had just busting unions and
chasing burglars. It couldn’t last—the law, I mean, it was too stupid,
but by the time it was repealed the force had a taste of what it was
like to walk the beat and see people back off and lam out and sit there
worrying till the bull walked by. Marijuana.”

“That’s been legal for forty years.”

“Forty-three,” said the old Chief smugly. Inwardly, Perk decided to be a
little less accurate. It did the old man a grain of good to be one up on
the schoolboy. “Ah, that was a great time. The greatest of all.
Outlawing tobacco was small potatoes compared with the marijuana thing,
because by then we were pretty well computerized and had sensors out
everywhere, sniffing for tobacco. Marijuana was made to order for law
enforcement; honest to God, if you was to draw a blueprint for some one
thing that would put pride into that empty place in all cops, it was
marijuana—pot, we used to call it. Booze, now, you needed a still and
you had to feed it with grain and sugar in big lots, big enough to flag
long before you even knew there was a still. Hard drugs and mindbenders,
like LSD and DMT, you needed a laboratory and skilled chemists. And the
street price got so high that big bundles of money were as easy to
notice as big bundles of grain and sugar back in Prohibition days.
Prostitution even—that used to be against the law—it had to have a place
to happen in some way to contact the public, all the time, every day,
every night. But pot, now, it’s a weed, it’ll grow anywhere for anybody,
indoors, in the back of the closet with a little UV light. It never did
get out-of-sight expensive, and you can carry a couple of sticks around
that would make a hell of a lot less bulge than a bottle. It spread like
you wouldn’t believe, all over the country, all up and down the income
brackets. It was in the poverty belts for the longest time, at first,
poor damn drones, it was the only thing most of ’em could afford to hide
from their troubles and that was all right with the force, because if
there is anywhere you want to lean hard on it’s the poor. A lot of
revolutionary stuff starts with them, and stealing and mugging and the
like, and it’s a great thing to have something like pot to go cruising
for, something cheap and easy to get and you can smell it! Back in the
Prohibition days, the biggest killer gangster of them all, name of
Campone—”

Perk opened his mouth to correct him, then learningly closed it again.

“—they never got him for anything he ever did except he didn’t file his
income tax, and for that they jailed him. Well, pot in a small way was
like that. You may not have anything on a suspect except you don’t like
his looks, chances are you can pat-and-frisk and come up with some
marijuana; one time, before the law eased up, we jailed a guy, he was
one of those against-the-war kooks, for three seeds we found in his coat
lining! There’s another guy, used to preach LSD like a religion, they
nailed him in Texas with four ounces of weed, gave him thirty years.
That cut down on the preachments a whole heap. You see what I mean.

“Rule two is that the idea some rookies got—maybe you had it, I don’t
know—that in the long run the police are in the business to eliminate
themselves—well, that’s just wrong. There was a time when dentists
claimed they would teach folks to take such good care of their teeth
they’d never need dentists; some doctors used to do the same kind of
promo. I’m going to give it to you straight; if ever a time comes when
there ain’t enough crime around to maintain a police force, somebody
will make new crimes, or make something everybody does or eats or drinks
or rubs on their belly a crime; but if they don’t, it’s up to the police
to do it. Just don’t get caught at it, is all. There’s always better
ways.

“Pot, now, it was full of better ways. Like in that war we fought in
Indo-China, there was all sorts of good grass around there, and when the
Army got gung-ho about the soldiers smoking it, some officer sniffing
one stick in a whole barracks and handing out dishonorable discharges,
the soldiers quit grass, which didn’t hurt them, and switched to heroin,
which did, just and only because heroin don’t smell. This was great for
us when those junkies got home, because the stuff they got here wasn’t
pure like what hooked them, it was cut ten times over, and cost so much
they couldn’t feed their habit without robbing and stealing; oh, we had
a ball with that. The next time you hear that marijuana leads to hard
drugs—well you don’t hear that anymore, but it was our Number One
chant—remember those soldiers. Pot smells. Heroin don’t.

“Oh God, those were the days! The money that went around! I remember a
government study ’way back in ’72, the figures …” The old man laughed;
it was not until then that Perk realized his own perennial wonderment:
did the old Chief ever laugh? Had he ever? There was indeed an
unpracticed tone to it, but it was real and hearty. And brief. “I used
to sing myself to sleep with them. A hundred seventy thousand low-level
dealers in the US, makin’ about $250 a month each. About a third got
busted each year. Got that? Now, the cost for bustin’ dealers and
potheads in California alone was forty-three million in ’69, it went up
from there, and a healthy slice of that came to us. You think we were
about to lean away from a shower o’ gold like that? We had PR blowouts
and block meetin’s all over, warning against evil, suggestin’ it was a
commie plot (you wouldn’t know what a commie is, or was) and when the
facts started flowing the other way we ignored ’em, when they got too
deep to ignore ’em we took refuge in: As Long As It Is Illegal We Will
Uphold the Law.” His voice supplied the complacent capitals. “Cops can
always do that. No cop is required to debate the justice of the law,
don’t you never forget that.”

“Was it dangerous, then?”

“Hell no. There is a big study clear back in 1899, the British, where it
showed up practically harmless. Even before that a limey doctor name of
Birch used pot to cure a chloral hydrate addict and a dude hooked on
opium, by steering them to pot and then withdrawing the pot; in the
Carolinas, in ’59 two doctors were curing addicts and alcoholics with a
derivative. I even remember their names, Thompson and Proctor, the
doctors, not the addicts.”

“And the government didn’t—”

“The government just lost the papers, and we, why we upheld the law.
Long as there was a law,” he added regretfully. “Finally all that was
left was a law against growin’ it, an’ even that faded. Now the
government has quality control on ten thousand acres in Mississippi and
grows a breed of marijuana so much better than you can grow yourself
that it just ain’t worth the little trouble it takes.” He sighed. “Take
away ‘forbidden’ from the fruit, sell it over the counter like candy
bars, make it so a smoker ain’t rebelling against anything, an’ then you
find what it really is and where it’s at: a big percentage of folks with
a high threshold, got to suck a bomber and a half to get where other
folks go with two hits; another big percentage just don’t like the taste
or smell and can now admit it; and worst of all, it ain’t like tobacco
and alcohol; it just ain’t addictive. Pretty soon a rock group is
singin’ it plumb out of fashion.”

“I know the one,” said Perk, and recited (he did not dare sing):

_Heroin will get you dead_

_LSD will mess your head_

_Marijuana gives a buzz_

_Just because you think it does_.

_Who needs it?_

“That’s it,” said the old Chief, and sighed again. “With tobacco gone,
pot pulls one and a half billion in taxes, and damn little of it comes
our way.

“So!” he rapped, and again landslid forward to catch his weight on his
elbows and knees. “Here’s where you come in.

“First of all you got to change your ways. You got to stop wearin’ your
education an’ good manners like national flags so everybody knows what
you are and where you come from. You got to act dumb, talk dumb but _do
everything right_. Any time you open your mouth it’s an opinion, not a
fact. Here’s a secret weapon: always act dumber than you are, and
everyone will treat you like a dumb-dumb, an’ you’ll always win. You
never read nothin’, you never learned nothin’ but the P.D. book o’
rules. Aside from that you say every stupid thing that comes into your
head, as loud as you can. Always remember that there’s only two kinds o’
people you got to worry about—big shots an’ morons. You listen to the
big shots an’ you talk to the morons—in moron talk. Never mind
in-betweens, the smarts. The big shots got the power an’ the morons got
the vote, and that’s a combination the smarts can’t beat, there ain’t
enough of ’em.

“All you need now is what they had in the old days—something you can
watch for everywhere, on anybody. Once it was books, would you believe?
Or certain kinds of meat. Alcohol. Marijuana. Tobacco. Anything, long as
most people are users an’ it’s illegal. You an’ your boys are going to
frisk-and-search. Stakeout. Infiltrate. The Marias are comin’ out of
mothballs, the courts will jam up again. We’re goin’ to have a force
again. Proud. Respected. Feared. There’ll be a black market start up.
You’ll let it get big an’ smash it for the news cameras. You’re goin’ to
be Chief. What’s that?”

Startled again, Perk followed the pointing finger. On a broad windowsill
stood a handsome plant with thick, fleshy, sword-shaped leaves. “Wh—oh.
Aloe. Aloe vera.”

“Tell me about it.”

“Everybody knows. Everybody’s got some. Cuts, scrapes, fleabites, it
stops the pain, stops the itch as soon as you squeeze out the jelly and
wipe it on. My roomy, she uses it for a hair rinse, face cream. That
brown inside layer, it’ll cure constipation. It cured my—”

“Well don’t stop there.”

“Piles,” said Perk with difficulty.

“Cured my stomach ulcer, too. Sunburn. Scalds, burns, it leaves no
blisters. Grows anyplace, indoors or out, likes to be neglected. Pups
out in three, four months, stick the pup in another jug an’ you got two.
In six months, a dozen. In a year, one hundred. Too bad, but progress
always costs.”

“You don’t mean … but—there’s nothing illegal about it!”

“Yet.” The old Chief rocked slowly back and effortfully raised his eyes.
“There’s a lot of heavy money don’t like the aloe vera a bunch. It snuck
up on ’em; nobody saw it happen. Cosmetics. Pharmaceuticals. Ethical
drugs. Doctors. All we need is a medical opinion, it causes infantile
sexuality. All we need is a Bible scholar discovers the snake hid it in
the Garden. All we need is a DOA with his stomach full of aloe vera
infusion. All we need is a little panic an’ aloe’ll pile up in the
street like snow; mind you, I _know;_ folks ain’t been scared in a long
time now. Then all we need is a Board of Health Condition Red: rotting
aloe can cause the plague.”

“You’ll never get a doctor or a priest to—”

The hating eyes open wide for a terrible moment, and then half closed.
“Want to bet?”

Perk slowly rose to his feet, while the Chief crooned, “Now you go on
down to HQ and get yourself braced up, because this is goin’ to be your
show. Do it right, an’ next time around, you are goin’ to be Chief.”

“Yes, sir.” Perk went slowly to the door, then turned. “Sir _ … why_
me?”

“Because you’re a fighter. You got to be … You always have been. You got
the one thing I never had, the one thing that’ll make you the greatest
Chief this ol’ town ever had—your name. A man’s got a strike against him
with a name like Smith or Jones or Davis or Robinson, my kind of name
but your name is Percival Noodlemix. You know what you’re goin’ to do
with that name? You’re goin’ to put hair on its chest. You’re goin’ to
put a gun in its hand. When you’re done they’ll be proud to name their
firstborns after you.

“Think a minute, son. Forgettin’ all about the man an’ his work, can you
think of a more sissified name than Ernest Hemingway?”

So began the aloe busts, the frisk for half-healed scrapes, the
nose-trained dogs, the piles inspections, the choked court calendars,
and the police walked proud, respected and feared, and, in time, the
babies were named Noodlemix.



WHY DOLPHINS DON’T BITE


Dom Felix invented the Receiver. So say the almanacs. So say the
encyclopedias, the infobanks, the students.

Dom Felix invented the Receiver.

Dom Felix was not educated in the theory or trained in the technology or
temperamentally suited to such an endeavor, but he did indeed accomplish
the greatest single upward, outward leap for his species since the
taming of fire.

Dom Felix invented the Receiver not because he was inspired but because
he was terrified; not because he had achieved wisdom but because he had
to confront the truth. Therefore, it had been obsession that brought
about the Receiver—obsession and terror.

The accepted version is that Dom Felix brought the Receiver from Earth.
This is not true; it was developed on Medea more than three terrayears
after he was defrosted there. He brought something, sure enough. He
brought news of the Great Acceptance, that strange mixture of
philosophy, religion, and logic (though it was really none of these)
that had so drastically changed the face of the earth. Had it been a
religion, Dom Felix might have been termed a missionary. Had it been a
philosophy, he would have come as a teacher. Had its logic been pure, he
might never have come at all. Nevertheless, he came, filled with the
wonder of the success of his credo, eager to bring it to another world.

_Defrosting_ is a word, and _Receiver_ is a word; the Receiver is an
ultrachron (some say “transchron”) transceiver. Humanity has always
encapsulated its pivotal discoveries in a word, at one time or another.
The Pill. The Church. The Bomb. The Trip. Cryogenics had nothing to do
with spaceflight, the detection of the bioenergetic aura, and the
subsequent development of the phase-inversion field, which became
operable before freezing was even tried for the purpose. Yet
_defrosting_ was still the name of the process by which the field was
shut off and the activity of every single one of the passengers’ organs
(and biochemical reactions and bacilli and viruses) could resume
functioning precisely as they had fifty-one terrayears earlier. He or
she would then know that the Trip was over.

“… four, three, two, one,” Dom Felix mumbled obediently, finishing the
countdown he had begun half a century earlier, and then he inhaled and
coughed at the strident edge of this different air, and “Oh?” at the
realization that his naked body, suited in fever heat and yet chilled,
was being deftly covered by another and his face was being buried in a
mass of honey-colored hair that smelled of sea spray and almonds, and
_“Oh!”_ as he felt a sensation that (by his own choice) he had never
known before. There was then a long series of undulations against which,
in his present condition, he had no defenses, until, with an unspellable
syllable that hurt his throat, he experienced an internal explosion that
left him two-thirds unconscious and with his eyes screwed shut. He was
remotely aware of the other body’s weight leaving his, and “Oh!”
(indignantly) as he opened his eyes and saw a nude female deftly
plucking a sheath from his most private apostrophe. She caught his eye
and smiled. “Welcome to Medea,” she said. Then she left.

Dom Felix shook his head in denial of this reality and, in the process,
saw that there was a tall, bearded man dressed in a waxy-looking short
tunic standing by his bed. The man had a voice like a tuba. He said,
“Welcome indeed, Dom Felix.”

Dom Felix raised his head to look in the direction of the vanished
woman. “Who was that?”

“That? That’s Wallich, about the best wide-spectrum technician there is.
Nothing but the best for you, you know.”

“Damn it,” said Dom Felix, surly. He ran over the big man’s words in his
mind, trying to make sense out of the outlandish accent. “Damn it, I’m
celibate.”

“Not now, you’re not,” said the man cheerfully “My name is Altair II.
_Two_, written archaically with two _I_’s. To differentiate me from my
father, who was Altair Junior, and to differentiate _him_ from _his_
father, who was just plain Altair. So although there have been three of
us, I’m called Two. What’s the matter?”

Dom Felix looked down at himself and made a vague gesture. “I feel
self-conscious, lying here like this.” He was a short, broad man with
thick, black brows over what seemed to be pupil-less black eyes, a
short, thick beard, short, thick fingers and legs, and a lot of hair on
his body.

“Never thought. Sorry,” said Altair, and, crossing his arms downward, he
grabbed the hem of his tunic and whipped it off over his head, whereupon
the woman Wallich entered. She was dressed a bit.

“Oh, God,” said Dom Felix. He sat up to protect himself. It made his
head swim, and he could feel the blood draining from his face. “Easy,”
said Wallich; she was by his side in one swift stride, holding him
competently by one shoulder and the small of his back.

“I think the clothes thing has turned around again,” said Altair.

“Oh, sorry,” said Wallich, releasing Dom Felix’s shoulder, her hand
darting to the clasp on her shoulder. Dom Felix managed to catch her
wrist. “Please, no. Just get me my clothes.”

“Right here,” said Altair. He lifted a storage case marked FELIX and
placed it on a small table and tapped a silver patch on the side. The
top sprang open, and he lifted out a heavy mass of black fabric. “The
group that came here not three years ago—everybody covered from ankles
to nose—screamed when they saw what we wear here. Of course, that was a
slow ship. It took almost eighty terrayears to get here. The one before
that, we couldn’t keep clothes on ’em. They felt it was dishonest. Even
out at the Rim, they’d rather freeze than be dishonest.”

“Please,” said Dom Felix, holding out one hand for the garment. He swung
his feet over the side of the bed and again felt the rush of faintness.
Wallich put her arms firmly around him. When he could, he disengaged
them. “I’m all right. _Please_.”

“That clothes thing,” said Altair, absently turning the heavy garment
over and around, evidently trying to find the most convenient way to
hand the thing to Dom Felix. “The pendulum swings, all through history,
but it doesn’t swing straight, and the frequency varies. Certain times
and places, it was immoral to display feet. Other places, knees. Faces.
Genitals. Bellybuttons. Buttocks. And combinations thereof. I have a
theory; the human race is innately disinterested in sex. The more so,
the nakeder it gets. So when people find the libido starting to atrophy,
they begin decorating the sexual emblems and pretty soon cover them up,
which is a very good way to put sex under forced draft. If it weren’t
for that, the species would’ve died out long ago. What we are, what
we’ve always been, is cripples. We got our rut cycles amputated; so we
have the clothes thing instead.”

Dom Felix blew air out through his nostrils and started to get up.
Wallich said, “Altair, stop chattering and give it to him; he’s not
ready to walk yet.”

“Oh, sorry.” Altair handed the garment over, and Dom Felix found a hem
and pulled the thing on over his head. He stood up and, with Wallich’s
deft assistance, got his arms through the sleeves and let the garment
fall around him. It was a heavy black burnoose that came halfway down
his shins. He sat back, trembling, and made himself raise the hood and
draw it over his head. With the beard beneath and the shadows above, his
face retreated into a dark cave, from which, astonishingly, his
black-on-black eyes glowed brightly.

“That’s better.”

“Put yours on too, Altair.”

“Huh? Oh. Oh, yes.” Altair scooped up his tunic and donned it. He
gestured at the burnoose. “That thing’ll be great for Circle Three on
out, but it’ll smother you in here.”

“Surely that’s not all you wear on Medea.”

“What you wear on Medea depends on where you are on Medea. Medea has
everything, all the time—cold, hot, wind, wet, dry, desert, mud, and
supermud. Here, where we are, is Pellucidar. Center of the earth.
Ancient term derived from the days when Terrans lived in burrows and ate
rice. This section is central to Earth Main, which is the middle
building of this colony, which is called Argoview, the dumbest name of
any of the Terran enclaves, because the only places there can be an
enclave on this crazy blob are places where you can view Argo. So air,
light, and humidity in Pellucidar are as near Earth average as we can
get. It’s positive pressure, like a ‘clean room.’ Any airflow is outward
from here, so the pressure stays the same. Then there are five
concentric segments, where the air is increasingly mixed with Medean
air; you move out at your own pace until you get used to it. When you
get used to it and come back in here, you find the lights too bright and
the air too thin and the oxy-mix making you a little ding-y.”

“It shows,” said Wallich, not unkindly. To Dom Felix she said, “You stay
here and talk to Altair, and relax. Please, relax. Your body has been
through a lot, and your head doesn’t know it yet, not really. I’ve got
to see how your fellow passenger is getting along.” She waved and left.

“Oh, God. Kert Row,” said Dom Felix. Altair raised an eyebrow. “Is that
Acceptance?” he asked good-naturedly.

“Has nothing to do with Acceptance,” Dom Felix said testily. “Kert Row
is an agricultural expert sent out here with new hardware dreamed up
according to new theories by Occam, and for two and a half weeks during
prep he did nothing but talk to me about the theories and the hardware.
It happens that I have no understanding and no talent in either area. I
wish I had. If I showed irritation then, it was at myself.”

Altair came over and sat down next to him. “You know I like you,” he
said candidly. “Most people, ’specially Trippers trying to make a heavy
impression, go all out to hide what they’re not good at. You come right
out with it.”

“Well, thanks. Thank you.” Somewhere in that portable dark, the shadowed
face showed that it was moved.

“And you’re not stupid. Fifty-one percent of smart is knowing what
you’re dumb at. An old financier named Brentwood said that.”

Dom Felix was now close to being embarrassed. “Go on with what you were
saying before.”

“Oh, yes. Pellucidar. Clothes. We wear what we please, or nothing, if we
feel like it. Why should we? Controlled environment, and, anyway, like
it or not, the skin is the largest organ of the body. It needs light,
and it needs to breathe, and it was never meant to be covered up all the
time. We grab as much light and this air as we can, when we can. There’s
damn little light and far too much of the other air out there.”

“That’s too bad,” said Dom Felix.

“What’s too bad?”

“Sorry. Thinking aloud. About what I have to do here. Pass it, please.”

“No, tell me about what you’re going to do. Acceptance, and all that.”

“Well, how much do you know?”

“Not too much. What I’ve learned, I like. From what I hear, it’s changed
the face of the earth. Nations don’t fight with nations, even brothers
don’t fight with sisters. A man about to cheat you in a game, or a deal,
suddenly tells you so and plays it straight. A contractor never
estimates the highest price he can get—just his cost plus a fair profit.
A man running for election starts out by saying everything bad he ever
did and tells the voters what bad habits he has that he hasn’t been able
to break, before he says anything about how good he is. That right?”

“That’s almost right. I mean, it’s not a hundred percent yet. But it’s
getting there. It is better than it’s ever been, back there on Earth.
There’ve been some bad times there, you know.”

“Sure I know. I didn’t tell you. I’m a historian. _An_ historian, if
you’re a purist in the Old Tongue. What that means is that I read a lot,
think a lot, see what of that which I read and think applies to where we
are and where we’re going, and pontificate about it. Out here we study
Old Earth probably a lot more than the homebodies. It keeps us
together.”

“And yet you’ve sent for me.”

“Oh, that. Well, yes, God knows we need you. We’re just about split in
two—if we’re not already. Two and a third, maybe. It’s the Gengies, you
see.”

“Gengies?”

“Genetically Engineered. They like to call themselves Truforms. They’re
all Medeaborn—if you can call making them born. They’re, well, produced.
If we need a supergenius math type or a guy _this_ wide and only _this_
high to work in the mines, we make one, that’s all. Not that we ever go
too far away from the norm. They may have a specialty, but they have to
live with us.”

“Us. Them.”

“Well, damn it, there _is_ a difference. We’re Naturals—Nats, we call
ourselves. We let God choose the genes, yes, and love. That’s the way
it’s always been; that’s what made us two-legged critters what we are.
Now they come along and act as if they’re _better_ than us!”

“Are they?”

“Whenever we design them to be, sure. Their specialties—they’re tops.
Why not? But do you think they’re grateful? No way! Look, they try to
reason it both ways. They’re superior because they’re good at what they
were designed for. And they’re deprived because we have history, an
ancient homeland, racial memory, and they haven’t. They’re better than
us, and they’re deprived. They can’t have it both ways, but they want it
both ways And there’s going to be trouble. Big trouble, and Medea isn’t
big enough for trouble like that. Well, Medea is, but the Terran
enclaves are not. There’s talk of the Gengies driving us out.”

“Out where?”

“Out there. It’s real hell out there, Dom Felix.”

“Who talks of the Gengies driving you out?”

“Well, everybody.”

“Who, everybody? Are the Gengies telling you that?”

“They aren’t telling us anything!”

“Ah. So it’s you Nats who are telling one another that.”

“Well, it figures.”

“Does it?” Dom Felix paused. “Tell me something. Do they like to be
called Gengies?”

“Oh, man, you’d better not. Not to their face.”

“Mm. And what do they call you among themselves?”

Dom Felix thought the man colored. When the answer seemed too long in
coming, Dom Felix turned wordlessly toward him and waited again. At last
Altair said in a low voice, “Vaj.”

“What?”

“Singular, Vaj. Plural, Vags. It means ‘vagina,’ vagina-born. And a lot
is in how they say it, too. There’ve been some pretty bad fights.”

“I can imagine. What’s this third group you mentioned?”

“Oh, them. They’re Mules.”

“Mules?”

“Once in a long while a Nat gets a Gengie pregnant. Though not me. They
make me nervous. And the other way ’round, too. And usually if a baby
gets born, it grows up sterile. Well, you’ve heard of that before, if
you know any biology. Take a lion and a tiger. Big cats, same diet,
pretty much the same habits. They won’t breed. If you try it under
laboratory conditions, you might make it once in twenty tries. And if
you don’t get a stillbirth, you’ll get a mule.”

“Yes, I know that. It’s the very definition of species. One of the basic
tenets of Acceptance is the simple scientific fact that there is no form
of humanity on Earth that cannot breed readily with any other. Never
mind should. Never mind might. They _can_. Once you grasp that, you
begin to understand man as what he is—a single species.”

“And what we have here,” said Altair, “is a different species, and
that’s all we’re saying.”

“You still get Mules, though, and that means you’re still very, very
close. Tell me. What do the Mules think?”

“That’s what we don’t really know. Dom Felix, do you know what a ‘swing
vote’ was in an old-time election?”

“That’s when a small party has enough votes, in a close election, to
decide which of the big ones will win, although they themselves have to
lose.”

“I like you better all the time,” Altair said warmly. “Well, that’s the
situation with the Mules. We can’t tell where they’ll throw their
weight. I’ll tell you this about them, though. In brains and in work,
they vary from excellent all the way down to good.”

“That’s the nicest thing you’ve said about me all day,” said Wallich
from the doorway, in a dangerously sweet voice. “Dom Felix, I’m one of
those Mules. Hee haw, and all that.”

“Oh, Lord, Wally, I, I didn’t, I mean I …” Altair turned almost
frantically to Dom Felix. “Listen, there stands the best synthesizing
technician in all Medea. There is nobody like her, nobody. Chemistry,
biochemistry, physiotherapy, psychotherapy, she can run any piece of
equipment in the place. Yes, she can _fix_ any piece of equipment.
That’s what I was just telling him, Wally!”

“I’m so pleased,” she said steadily, and there were tears in her eyes.
“Now tell him that I have ears as good as yours, feelings as tender as
yours, and that I can hurt. Just as much as a _real_ person.” And she
turned quietly and left.

Altair sprang to his feet. “Man, I did indeed blast it good. I’d better
go and—”

With a cold sternness Altair had not yet seen, Dom Felix pointed to the
bed beside him. “You’d better sit right down again.” A moment of
confusion, then Altair came and sat. More gently, Dom Felix said, “It
won’t do a bit of good to chase after her now if I’m any judge, and I
am. Later will do, and I’ll help if I can, and I can.”

“Now you’ve been almost embarrassing in expressing your liking for me.
I’m going to embarrass you twice. One: I like you. I like you very much.
I think you’re super-bright, and I think your instincts are in the right
place, and I think you’re basically honest. Two: I think your long view
of human affairs has preoccupied you so much that you’ve lost your link
to the short view: here, now Medea. You told me that your function here
was to apply that link, and I am telling you that you are not doing it
and that therefore you are not doing your Job.”

“Now wait a—”

“It’s testing time, Mister Historian, and I’m glad that’s your specialty
and that I can speak to it and that I can make my point simply and
quickly without sidling up to it. Do you know what a Catharist was?”

“Well, I—”

“A Huguenot, a Jansenist?”

Altair nodded. “The Huguenots were—”

Implacably, Dom Felix drove on: “Waldenses, Adamites, Irgun Zwei Leumi,
Mormons, Mau Maus, Pieds Noirs, the Confederacy, Symbionese, Froets
Raiders, Sans-Culottes, the Polar Gang, the IRA, the Anzac Hangmen, the
PLO?”

“Most of those. A lot of them, anyway. The Polar—”

Overriding, Dom Felix demanded, “What were the issues of the Thirty
Years War? Why the story that men and women were hanged for wearing the
color green? Did you know that men were flogged and churches were burned
because they did or did not have candles on the altar? Why would a man
be hunted down and speared like a boar because he had been seen raising
his wine glass over a glass of water? What were the issues? What were
the issues?”

“Well, in the case of—”

“Ah! You know. You know because you are Mister Historian. But suppose
you are not Mister Historian. You are a modern Terran with a good
education and a fine background, and I say to you, Catharists. I say,
Waldenses. I say, what are the issues?”

“I … I guess I’d have to say, I don’t know. I’d have to say, I’ll look
it up.”

“But if I say, modern Terran, does it matter what the issues are? Does
it really matter to you?”

“Well, I guess not. Not now.”

“Aha. Now we have it. _Not now_. Altair Two, I submit to you, looking
down the long sweep of history, that it did not matter then, those
things for which people fought and died and were imprisoned and tortured
and burned; that in the deepest sense it did not matter if a man turned
his face toward Mecca or Rome or Canterbury or stood alone on a rock on
a mountain and poured prayer on the rising sun or paid his tithes to
this or that emperor. Yes, of course, it was made to matter to the man,
but in the larger sense the issues were issues that had no real
significance. I read a story about a man who traced back through three
centuries of warfare to find the basic issue, and it turned out to be a
quarrel over the king’s breakfast, whether one should break a boiled egg
on the big end or the little end.”

“That was, ah, Dean Swift. _Tolliver’s Travels_.”

“Thank you. I’d forgotten. And I submit to you now that your splits here
on Medea, with your Nats and Mules and Vags and Truforms, are of the
same category and do … not … _matter!_”

They sat glaring at each other for a moment, Dom Felix less and less as
the moments passed, Altair II more and more until he exploded.

“By God it does _matter!_ Do you think we can run the risk of the
Geng—ah, Truforms—breeding at random, one with superior size and another
with a superior logic, a double-dominant, and a brat who would grow up
to be something we couldn’t handle? Do you think we want to repeat the
mistake of the Computer Wars, when men had to obey the commands of their
own creations? Damn it, Dom Felix, the only reason the issues you just
reeled off—Oh hell, man, you do know your history!—don’t matter is that
those issues were settled—fought and won and done with, and that’s why
they don’t matter. This one is here and now, and we will fight, we will
bleed, I will bleed! It’s got to be stopped! Then in another thousand
years you can look back and say that only a specialist can even remember
what the issues were. But you can’t say it now.”

“I can say it now, and I do. The issues are what they have always been
when men turn on one another. You have the power, and I want it. I have
the power, and you must obey. I will kill you if you do not give me the
power. I will kill you if you threaten to take my power away. It is that
_that_ does not matter; it is that that is triviality.”

“Well, if you think we’re going to knuckle under to a bunch
of … of … why, they’re not even _human!_”

“Altair, _my_ history books say that from time to time the Visigoths
were not human, the Japanese, the Jews, the Germans, the Irish, the New
Jibaros, the—”

“Propaganda talk, Dom Felix,” Altair interrupted tiredly. “But this one
time they really _are not human!_”

“And I too really am not human.”

The voice behind them was metallic and not quite a monotone, and
synchronized with it was a series of soft grunts, whistles, and squeaks,
all but inaudible. Dom Felix whirled around and gasped. Altair whirled
around—and laughed.

Squatting against the back wall was the strangest animal? creature?
being? monster? that Dom Felix had ever seen. It rose as they turned; it
was taller than Dom Felix, though not as tall as Altair. It was covered
in gray-blue fur, with large upthrust triangular ears, clawed feet with
slender ankles, and extremely massive thighs, shaped rather like those
of a wolf, but obviously jointed to what must be something very like a
human pelvis, for it could stand upright with its legs almost straight.
The arms were long and slender and seemed to be muscled with knotted
steel cable. What at first seemed to be a decoration or even a kind of
garment proved to be an inordinately long tail, wound diagonally around
the torso upward from its base, just over the small potbelly, and on
around and around until its pointed bony tip rested in the area of what
would be, in a human, the clavicle. Hooked around the neck was a padded
metal band bearing a small grille and a slender curved wire, terminating
in a knot the size of a thumbnail, which hovered a few centimeters from
the mouth—or was _snout_ a better term? A purplish tongue flicked out
and in, and Dom Felix was able to see a flash of blue-white teeth,
clearly those of an omnivore, with blunted canines and very even,
manifestly sharp incisors. The most fascinating feature to Dom Felix was
the hands, which bore two two-jointed opposable digits and two very long
fingers with small curved claws and, in the palms, a protruding
chitinous pair of nippers, or beaks, shaped rather like a parrot’s but
more slender. As the two men rose and turned, it was striking and
scraping the two sets of nippers together, making a dry, high-pitched
chirping sound.

“Laughing,” said Altair aside to Dom Felix, briefly imitating with his
own hands the movement of the creature’s. “That’s the way he laughs.”
Aloud, he cried: “Aquare, you ol’ long-tailed hop-toad—I’m glad you blew
in! This is Dom Felix here at last—he just tripped down. Dom Felix, this
is my oldest friend on Medea. Really. He used to bounce me in his arms
while my mom was working in the labs.”

The long, thin lips quivered and moved; the strange sequence of whistles
and clicks emerged softly while the little metal grille said, “Please be
welcome and the happiest, Dom Felix. We have spoken much of you and how
you have saved the Terra.”

“I have heard a great deal about you, too. You are quite a celebrity on
Terra, you know And please, I have not saved the Earth, not at all. I
think the Movement I work in has done a great deal of good; it was doing
it before I joined, and all I am doing is to try to return the good it
has done me.”

“Ah, please lengthen yourself.”

Dom Felix turned a puzzled face to Altair, who laughed and said, “He
means, essentially, don’t be modest. Ask him how old he is.”

“What?”

“Go ahead.”

“Aquare, would you mind telling me how old you are?”

“I have achieved my maturity.”

Altair said, “You know, according to the records, that is precisely the
answer he gave more than eighty terrayears ago. Ask him why he is the
only Arcan—that’s his city, Arca—the only one who has ever learned our
language.”

“Why is that, Aquare?”

“There is no need.”

Altair said, “That’s from eighty terrayears ago, too. Years before that
he showed up at the enclave, when it was nothing but a dome and a few
fields. He just hung around all the time, didn’t want food, didn’t want
anything. Security got very uptight at first, but, thank the powers, we
had a Big Chief with the wit not to blast him. Just a tight guard and
observers. One day one of ’em, a bright Gen—ah, Truform—called Zylo,
noticed those noises he was making and claimed to recognize words. A
whole team got to work on it and designed the first version of that
computer-translator he’s wearing. It’s been improved a lot since then.
And he’s been a great help. He’s arranged a dozen or more tours to Arca
over the years, though not much anymore. Nothing changes over there.
You’ll see for yourself when you start to move around.”

While he spoke, the Medean stood quite motionless, head turned to one
side. Dom Felix realized suddenly that he did not have binocular vision.
Like a rabbit or a squirrel or most Terran birds, the averted head meant
Aquare was looking straight at him. Altair was saying, “Neither Aquare
nor any other Arcan ever asked for or took a thing from us. Even when
our engineers thought they had a better way to do something, or some
device or gadget to give to them that they might use, they just looked
at it and walked off, and old Aquare here just wouldn’t say why. ‘We are
content,’ ” he mimicked, and the Medean went _chirp-chirp-chirp_. “And
what the hell! We’re just not in competition. There’s plenty of room, we
never built near Arca or any fishing or hunting ground we thought they
might use; we can’t eat the same food; there’s just no reason for any
friction. So as time went on, Aquare became free to come and go any
time. He stays out of the way—he has a real instinct for that—and he
never goes into restricted areas or anywhere where he might hurt
himself. He’ll talk to you for as long as you like, anytime, and never
gets miffed if you have to cut it short. He’ll answer any
question—almost—and I just can’t remember his ever asking one.”

“Doesn’t he mind our talking about him behind his back to his face like
this?”

“Say no; say no,” said the strange mixed voice. “I am a very pleasant
conversation.”

“Another Terran tripped down with Dom Felix, Aquare. Would you like to
meet him?”

“He is Kert Row. I have meet him. He and machines and theories all happy
harmony together I do not think they harmony with Medea. I do not say
him that. I wish he happy until rested. Time then find out.”

Altair groaned. “Here we go again. It’s that damn Occam. Such a great
idea in theory, a projective computer that will give you the simplest
possible solution using all the data, because, according to ‘Occam’s
Razor,’ the simplest solutions have the greatest possibility of being
right. But how do you tell Occam that problems on Medea are not simple,
that solutions that work are never simple, and that there’s no way to
feed the computer all the data?”

“It’s been pretty good at cutting transmission time from Earth to Medea,
though, receiving laser as long as the trip is in range, computing
probable outcomes, and beaming those ahead,” Dom Felix said. “That’s
what brought me here at this time instead of maybe forty years later.”

“That is a truly horrible thought,” said Altair. To the Medean he said,
“Dom Felix is going to solve all our problems for us.”

“Going to try,” said Dom Felix, suspecting that the cheerful historian
might have a touch of vicious irony in him.

“I hear him solving,” said Aquare. “Waldenses, Adamites, Irgun Zwei
Leumi.” A pause. “Altair II, you put you ear far down in mouth of Dom
Felix. Leave there.” Pause again. “Could be Dom Felix is very great. Or
very very great. Or the greatest Terran yet on Terra. On Medea. Soon I
will know.”

Blushing like a schoolgirl, Dom Felix said, “I really don’t think I’m so
great, Aquare.”

“True. But could be. Soon I know.”

“I really don’t know what to say,” murmured Dom Felix sincerely.

“Say you sleep now. You more tire than you know. Dream happy.”

“Omigod, yes!” cried Altair. “I shouldn’t have kept you up, got you all
stirred up.” He leaped up, swung Dom Felix around, and lowered him
gently. Sleep approached with a rush, holding back just long enough for
him to hear Aquare intone sagely, “There is no should. There is only
is.”

Kert Row, tow-headed engineering genius, lay with his eyes open and
started up when Altair came in. “Hi. Hey,” he said, abruptly propping
himself up on his elbow, “you know who that is in there?”

“Sure do. Dom Felix. And he just corked off, which is what you ought to
be doing.”

“I don’t mean just his name. Do you know who he _is?_”

“Fill me in. It’s hard to know when Occam leaves off on facts and fades
in the projections. The projections are pretty impressive, though.”

“I haven’t seen them,” said the engineer, “but, sight unseen, I am here
to tell you they don’t do that man justice. You just don’t know what
happens when that man turns on … whatever you call it that he turns on.”
He laughed. “Words just don’t do it, see? Look, I saw him put a hundred
thousand people in a stadium into some sort of a, oh hell, I was going
to say trance. It wasn’t a trance. You wake up from trances.”

“He certainly spun my head around.” Altair pursed his lips.

“I know what you mean,” said Kert Row. (Altair doubted that.) “But you
have to see him in action, with a crowd, I mean, before you can
appreciate what happens when you’re alone with him. After that stadium
thing, when I found out I was going to prep with him for two and a half
weeks, I thought he was going to burn me to a crisp in the first twelve
minutes. But you know what? The whole time he let me talk. He wanted me
to talk, and he really _listened_. I was the guru, he was the student.”

“Well, he was,” Altair said. “He told me that. He said he was angry at
himself for having so little knowledge, so little talent in your field,
and how he wished he had even some of what you had.”

“He _did?_ Oh … my …” The “my” came out despairingly, as if he had
searched for expletives and found none that would suit and had to fall
back on something so pale. Altair hoped he would not actually ask
whether he had had the same experience with the man in the black
burnoose, and his hope was realized. Kert Row fell very suddenly asleep
with a luminous smile on his face. Altair did not know how long he stood
there, tanning his heart with the smile.

“Oh.”

He turned around. Wallich. One long stride, and he had her, upturned
hands on her elbows. He said, “No more ‘Mule,’ public or private. Ever.”

Tears. There had been tears before, too, but what a difference! He had a
mad thought that they must taste different, angry tears and … and these.
He slid his arms around her, and she leaned against him for a time He
raised his head, then turned it toward the door, a quiet suggestion. She
stood back and looked into his face, eyes wide open and certain, and
shook her head. “Not now, Altair. And not for a very long time, but
thank you.” She tiptoed to kiss him swiftly on the corner of the mouth
and went out.

He glanced at the other door, the adjoining room where Dom Felix slept.
_Little hairy man_, he thought, _you do move and shake things around
here_.

In the weeks that followed (Terran weeks, of course; Medea stubbornly
and reverently adhered to Old World time), Dom Felix visited, Dom Felix
observed, Dom Felix questioned and listened and studied; he became as
ubiquitous as the Arcan Aquare, appearing everywhere, anywhere, at any
time at all, while staying out of the way.

He witnessed the departure of the lander that had brought him and
experienced the strange mixture of feelings experienced by all Trippers;
it was unlike any other departure since men first traveled, boarded,
entrained, and emplaned, for there was no waving from the rail, no
message from over a horizon, no captain’s table, flight attendant—none
of that. There were seventeen days of psychological and biological
preparation, and then immersion in the bioenergetic phase—inversion
field—all this planetside. Subjectively, the Trip was instantaneous;
objectively, a half-century or so. Between these extremes of time,
Occam, the projective computer, drank information until the well ran
dry, soaked up by distance. It did its extrapolations, and, when it
could, it sought and found its opposite number on the approaching ship
(for ships, few as they were, were scheduled to coincide going and
coming, so they might pass each other somewhere near Midpoint Turnover).
As long as they could, they swapped and shared and then turned their
lasered cargoes on their destinations, so that when they arrived, all
their news and knowledge were there before them. It was difficult to
regard the Trippers as strangers; only the destination was strange, and
that only to the Tripper himself. Knowing all this, it was a quite
indescribable emotional experience to watch the departure of a shuttle
bound for its orbiting interplanetary—a launch that, if one tripped
again, one would not feel, a Trip that, from beginning to end, one would
not truly experience, in a ship one would never see. For all that, the
launch represented the casting off, the burning of the bridge, the lost
opportunity to take it all back, cancel the plans, go back home. And
then the impact that no amount of prep could ever quite erase: _You
can’t go home again_. That poignant truth so often learned by any
growing consciousness was multiplied immeasurably: Home wasn’t there
anymore. A true-time century would take care of that.

His acclimatization took considerably less time than anyone had
expected, and soon he was able to stay quite comfortably at the Rim,
breathing ninety percent Medean air and becoming accustomed to Medea’s
strange and multishadowed light—what some forgotten technician with a
poetic twist had called thick light. He found, as had others before him,
that his eyes, more and more, winced from the brilliant light flooding
the Terran agricompounds, finding comfort in the more muted tones of the
land and the faintly luminous dull oranges of the estuary. The winged
structures of the outbuildings fascinated him, for Earth had never seen
the like; ultimately he would claim one of them as his own.

His preoccupation, of course, was with people, the interaction of people
with people and between people and ideas. He won the confidence of the
Big Chief, Director Kesseridge, a born administrator who was so good at
his job that it was rumored he might be a Truform, made to order; so
good at his job that he was bored with it, bored as only a man can be
who has no alternative to that which he does well. Dom Felix was able to
interest him in that facet of Acceptance that taught the ability to
listen to a man being wrong without correcting him. It was hard to do,
even to grasp, at first, but when he set out to practice it, he found
himself welcomed more and more in places and in situations he had never
dared approach before. He thought this was a miracle and Dom Felix was a
magician, and thenceforward all doors were open to the hairy little man
in the black burnoose.

Dom Felix acquainted himself with all the sections—astronomy,
agriculture, meteorology, biochemistry, radiology, xenology,
bioenergetics, ecology, and all the divisions of life support. Most
often he was the student and the specialists were the teachers;
occasionally he displayed absolutely astonishing knowledge in one field
or another. He had no intuitive grasp of mechanics or number, in its
widest sense, but he was as fascinated as a wondering child at what they
could do. He seemed (because it was genuinely so) ashamed of what he
considered vast holes in his erudition, and his expression of it can
only be called bold embarrassment—an immediate willingness to announce
the fact that he did not know and that he could not grasp. It was most
disarming, and it made no enemies. And he began to distribute his sign.

Interest in it developed slowly. He did not force it or sell it or seem
to attach much significance to it. He simply did it. Regarded at first
as a mere quirk, it began to attract attention and then curiosity; when
in a conversation would he make this sign, and did these occasions have
anything in common? What was its purpose, and what did it mean? Speaking
with someone, he would put out his hands, palms down, the left resting
on the right, and raise them together almost to the level of his face,
while slightly inclining his head. Then the hands would fall away and
the talk would continue. Thought at first to be a gesture of greeting or
of farewell—a kind of _sayonara_—it was gradually noticed to occur at
neither of these events.

It was, in its quiet way, extraordinarily potent. The hands placed
together and raised appeared to be defensive, to say “Stop!” But the
inclined head turned it into a tribute, a concession: “You have a point
there.” One thing was certain. Whatever provoked the gesture—intensity,
passion, rudeness, that kind of positiveness once described as “being
wrong at the top of your voice,” or even simple inaccuracy—once the
gesture was made, it ended with Dom Felix having the floor. It was one
of the most ingenious stoppers ever devised, and the more its meaning
was understood, the more potent it became.

The day Acceptance entered Medea was the day someone was moved to ask of
the sign, “What does it mean when you do that?”

Dom Felix smiled and answered. “It’s a way of becoming.” No more would
he say about it for a long time.

The day Acceptance began to ferment in the enclave was the day someone
thought to ask, “A way of becoming what?”

And Dom Felix smiled and answered, “It’s a way of becoming you.”

He would discuss this, when asked, though he never forced it. He
explained that when he used the sign, he suspended his own thought and
even his own identity and made a profound effort to _become_ the other
person, to see with his eyes, feel with his fingertips, think with all
his method and mode, background and learning. So the gesture did indeed
cry, “Stop!”—not to the observer, conversant, opponent, but to Dom Felix
himself. And the quality of obeisance was real, because for that moment
the other was dominant. And the air of concession was real, for during
that moment the other was as right, as authoritarian, as commanding, as
he felt himself to be.

The day Acceptance achieved full flow on Medea was the day one man used
the sign on another, and neither was Dom Felix.

And the day Acceptance could acknowledge its victory was the day a
Natural used the sign in talking to a Truform. Mission accomplished.

The mission was, of course, not accomplished in any single hour, for the
concept had to soak in cell by cell, as bread takes up red wine. And
like any battle won, it had then to be secured, and to this Dom Felix
now turned his attention. During the time in which the raised hands were
replacing the raised fist, Dom Felix worked toward the root cause of the
rift between the Naturals and the Truforms. “It has to be simple,” he
told Altair. “All basic things are simple. Complicated things might be
vital, they might make great literature and music and empires and human
disasters. But if they are complicated, they are by definition not
basic.” Altair spent a good deal of time with him, especially since Dom
Felix had gently pointed out to him something he should have known,
something that had sidled up on historians since the first troglodyte
grunted the tale of last month’s contest with the timber wolf: History
isn’t only _then;_ it’s now. Dom Felix, in his turn, was delighted with
the big man’s growled and pithy comments. “Ye shall know the truth,” he
said one day, “and the truth shall make you frantic. Mankind has never
solved its problems. It has just substituted larger ones.”

And Wallich. Wallich was invaluable to Dom Felix because of her wide
knowledge of so many technologies and their theoretical underpinnings.
Her ability to make clear analogies between anything she knew well and
anything else she observed was a knack so absent from Dom Felix that he
carried a kind of vacuum in its place. Like all movers and shakers
before him, he was an obsessive and lacked the synthesist’s ability to
seek for the balance in things, to turn the coin over, to seek for
parity when imbalance fell in his wished-for directions. Wallich had
changed radically since his arrival, polite and efficient as always but
intimate with no one. She made herself useful, close to essential, to
Dom Felix while carrying on all her other responsibilities. And if this
cost her recreation and sleep, she bore it well. No one knew.

The third favorite of Dom Felix was the young agricultural engineer who
had Tripped out with him, Kert Row. True to Altair II’s prediction, the
hardware he had brought with him—automatic machinery to invert and
neutralize the hormone poisons that made Terran crops and bacteria
lethal to those of Medea—was useless. The theories the hardware was
based on were nonsense. Faced with the facts, he made no effort to deny
them. Despite his years of labor in the R&D of something the computers
assured him would work, but that did not, he flung his energy and design
genius into new problems, half a dozen of them, ranging from jet-cycle
improvements (they say the level-deck stabilizer was his) and a new
high-acceleration centrifuge to mess-hall conveyors and a balanced-light
easel for the art section in recreation. His grasp of physical
principles was so clear and immediate that it was he, for example,
rather than Aquare or any of the old hands, who was able to explain to
Dom Felix the basic idea of an Arcan wing structure just by looking at
one. All Terran buildings were designed this way now, dome buildings
having been all but abandoned. Medea’s ferocious, unpredictable winds
were capable of sweeping away almost any kind of surface structure, just
as a hurricane-proof building will blow apart in a tornado. “By golly,
they got wings!” exclaimed Kert Row the very first time he and Dom Felix
looked out from the Rim of Pellucidar across the Terran compound. “Those
buildings. You see? Wings. Airfoils!”

Dom Felix looked at the odd structures, puzzled. They were rooted to the
ground, and they bristled with short, thick shelves, as if a builder,
assigned to apply eaves, had suffered an acute attack of surrealism and
had stuck short pieces allover the roof and walls. At Kert Row’s command
he watched them carefully, through the twirl and bluster of the Medean
gusts. The “wings” were trembling, becoming thick, then thin, twisting,
warping. “How about that!” the engineer said admiringly “How about damn
well that!”

“I don’t understand.”

“Those buildings don’t fight the wind. They use it! Watch that. There,
do you see? You see what’s happening? Those foils can sense wind
direction and force, make one edge a leading edge and the other a
trailing edge, and bulge the chord enough to give positive or negative
lift, or … yes, see that? They can twist from the root, acting like the
control planes on an underwater craft. But, working together, they ride
the wind or use it to press down or relieve strain no matter where the
wind blows from or how strong the gust is. But, my God, they have to
sense and react in microseconds! How do they do that in time?”

“Are you really asking me?” Dom Felix was awed and genuinely humble.

“I go find out,” said Kert Row, and he pelted off. When excited, he
would speak in some idiom of his own, a sort of baby talk. Dom Felix
looked after him admiringly and turned back to contemplate the bristle
of nervous wings.

Kert Row indeed found out and returned with an explanation, not one word
in ten of which Dom Felix understood. It was a welter of chips and
microsensors, pressure magazines, release valves, dynaflex and alloy
cores, microcryogenic superconducting hairs, and lots more. _By
definition not basic_, thought Dom Felix, _but it works_. He was
overwhelmed with admiration for Kert Row’s ability in this, to him,
impenetrable area. He let himself float uncomprehendingly in this sea of
words until he heard Kert Row say, “And you know what? It’s an Arcan
design.”

“It’s a what? I understood the Arcans had no technology to speak of.”

“Right. They haven’t. They grow the wings for their buildings. They have
a central building in Arca with a tower thirty meters tall—in this
wind!”

“Grow them?” Dom Felix asked.

“This is a crazy place,” said the engineer, and it was a compliment to
the place. “This is a crazy toy shop. All the weather there ever was,
one place or another; little ecological pockets, all kinds of
mutati-potent radiation. But look, even on Terra we have little plants
that fold their leaves when you touch them. Why not a plant that adjusts
its leaves to support the plant in variable hurricanes? Survival is
survival.”

_Well, that’s basic_, said Dom Felix to himself, and he reflected that
basics may be simple, but when you get all the way down, you don’t get a
thing or even a method. You get a principle. “Then why do we need all
that hardware?”

“Because we’re poison to Medean life forms, just the way they are to us.
We can’t work with living plants or living anything, not with any
reliability. We _can_ work with their principles.”

“That’s what I just said,” and only then did Dom Felix realize he hadn’t
said it aloud. He went away to meditate on the nature of basics and the
nature of principles. And it was through this path that he secured the
victory of Acceptance on Medea.

“I want to find the truth, the real truth, about something,” he told
Wallich one day. “And I think you’re the one to ask. You are not a Nat,
and you are not a Truform.” He saw her tense, but only because, by now,
he knew exactly what to look for, and he was looking for it. My, she was
cool.

She looked at him levelly. “And exactly what am I, in your eyes?”

“A real person.”

It was quite the right thing to say. “What do you want to know?”

“Something that perhaps I shouldn’t be asking. If I really shouldn’t,
will you keep my asking confidential and tell me anyway?”

She looked at him for a long moment, level eyes under a frame of heavy
honey hair. She seemed to find in him a man who could keep a confidence,
and perhaps by then she had one herself that might need to be kept. She
nodded.

“Thank you.” It was no idle, push-button Thank You. “Nats are fertile,
Truforms seldom are. Why?”

“Because of the way a Truform is designed and decanted. Realigning his
DNA gives him or her whatever special talent is needed but takes away
the ability to reproduce. But why should that make a difference? He or
she can make love or have sex fun just like anybody else, and if it’s
children they want, they can get them by contract easily enough.”

“They get a special talent or structure, and it costs them fertility.
The one means the other.”

“Everybody knows that.”

Dom Felix smiled. “You’d be surprised at the things ‘everybody knows’
from time to time. Once everybody knew that old Terra was flat, and if
you went too far, you could fall off the edge, and it rested on the back
of a big turtle, and the sun went around it.”

She laughed. “No.”

“Oh, yes. Now everybody believes that the engineers can’t design in a
new characteristic without eliminating fertility.”

“Well, they can’t. Or they don’t. They never have. Dom Felix, what are
you driving at?”

“I’ve just been fantasizing that maybe the earth is round like a ball.”
He had at times a sudden and childlike smile, and he used it now “I’ve
been thinking that maybe the gengineers _can_ inject a special
characteristic without eliminating fertility—always could. They just
don’t.”

“Well, they can’t,” she said positively. “And if they ever could, why
haven’t they? If they had, there wouldn’t be this trouble between them
and the Va—er, Nats.”

He spread his hands. “If I knew for sure, I could stop fantasizing about
it. Wallich, will you check it out for me?”

“Well, sure, if you really want me to, although it’s like finding out if
we really breathe oxygen.”

“Then find out if we really breathe oxygen,” he said. “But, Wally, find
out _carefully_, all right? I’d as soon nobody knew I was wondering
about it. And be careful. It just might be a hot question—hotter than
you realize.”

“I don’t believe it, but—all right, I’ll be careful.” She rose in a
swirl of gossamer and went out.

Dom Felix leaned back in the lounger, which gently massaged his lower
back, and he began to meditate. He was interrupted after a time by a
soft, rapid chirping. “Aquare!” He opened his eyes. He was right. The
bizarre creature squatted against the wall by the door, brushing his
long, strange hands together in his mode of laughter.

“You’re laughing at me.” Dom Felix said this without rancor. He had by
this time become quite accustomed to the Medean’s appearances, which
seemed to be occurring more and more often. He had been told at his
defrosting that the Arcans, like virtually everything else on Medea, had
no conflict with humanity, no competition for anything with the possible
exception of Lebensraum, and there was still plenty of room on plenty of
land and probably always would be. Medea’s function in the universe—as
Terrans conceived the universe—was to supply one single export:
knowledge. There seemed no reason for Arcans, or even one Arcan, not to
have the same motivation: to acquire knowledge without conflict, without
competition, without friction. And if from time to time Terran and Arcan
found each other funny, it was to be expected. Accepted.

“Laughing is I am intelligenter; you a foolish.”

“What?”

“Laughing is I see you in shame.”

“Aquare, I don’t feel—”

“Laughing is pretense attack, all knowing is pretense,” the almost
uninflected voice, with its background of soft squeaks and gurgles, went
on. Dom Felix stopped trying to respond and began simply listening,
trying to follow.

“Laughing is hiding afraid. Laughing is you unhappy; I happy I am not
you.” (Dom Felix realized at last that Aquare was making a list.)
“Laughing is I give you happy then I happy with you. Laughing is I
sudden-quickly admire. Laughing is I see I have no word to say. Laughing
is I have no word to say, cannot find word to say, no not ever and must
say no more. Laughing is more-more-more.” _Chirp-chirp_.

“Ah,” said Dom Felix. “What you’re saying is that there are many kinds
of laughter and that it can mean many different things. You couldn’t be
more right. Whole big books, whole studies, have been done about
laughter. So … why were you laughing at me?”

“Sudden-quickly admire. Again. More.”

“Well, thank you, Aquare. I really don’t know what I might have done to
earn it.”

“All. So far.”

“So far. You mean I’m on the right track? Going in the right direction?”

“What is right.” There was no inflection to indicate that this might be
a question, but what else, thought Dom Felix, could it be? What is
right? What is right, for whom, under what circumstances, and, in the
sweep of growth and change, for how long? _What is right?_ That was a
big one.

He laughed. _Laughing is I have no word to say_, and the Medean chirped
right along with him.

They sat for a while in companionable silence. In his many encounters
with the strange Medean—and he realized there had been a great many
recently, an increasing number, as he moved about dropping his seeds of
Acceptance—he had noticed that he was quite comfortable with the silent,
brief appearances and with the conversations, short and long, shallow
and deep, as they occurred, but also with the “being together” kind of
association. “Being-together,” he murmured.

_Chirp-chirp-chirp-chirp_.

Wallich came in. “Dom Felix, I—oh.”

_Chirp-chirp_. Aquare unfolded himself from his squat by the wall and
went away.

“I hope I didn’t—”

“He was just leaving anyway,” Dom Felix overrode her. (How had he known
that? Had he known that?) He had no time to think it through; words
tumbled from the girl.

“I didn’t ask anybody. I mean I did, but it wasn’t anybody, it was the
Central. I guess if you hadn’t warned me, I’d have wandered in and asked
Jeth or Harrick or someone else in Gengineering, but I didn’t. I went to
the computer, and you know what?”

“I think I do.”

“It just read out EP. I asked it if sterility was the result of
characteristic injection, and I got EP. I asked if DNA redesign
necessarily resulted in sterility, and it said EP. I asked the same
question from every possible direction, and that’s all I got—EP, EP,
EP.”

“I don’t know what EP means.”

“Oh. Established Procedure. But you know that’s a dumb answer. That
isn’t an answer at all!”

“That’s right.”

“It’s as if Central was programmed to answer any question like that that
way.”

“That’s right.”

“How did you know, Dom Felix?”

“I didn’t know. It’s just—well, it had to be that way. Vags and Gengies
and Mules—excuse me—and all that fear. There had to be something people
just didn’t know. That kind of fear always comes from something people
just don’t know. In this case it isn’t this group or that group that
doesn’t know. Nobody knows. So everybody’s suspicious and afraid. Tell
me something, Wally, about Established Procedure. Who established it?”

“Oh, who knows? Gengineering’s been done on Medea for a hundred years,
and the procedures were coded back on Terra before that. The only
variations we do here have to do with characteristic design: physical,
mental, and not an unlimited number of those. The basic procedures—what
produces a whole human being—well, they just are, that’s all.”

“The word for that is _tradition_,” said Dom Felix, “and that brings
about the rule of the dead hand. Wally, the reason I asked you to be
careful in your questioning is that I thought we had stumbled on a deep,
dark, deadly plot.” His smile came and went. “It isn’t. It’s the dead
hand. It’s people who did right things the right way a long time ago.
But the things they did lived after them, the same things, the same way,
while the world and the universe changed around them. Ask Altair about
Marxism and revisionism. Ask him about Catholicism and Luther. The
greatest movers and shakers our species has ever known, the greatest
thinkers, have, one and all, done one inexcusable, thing: they died, and
their accomplishments froze at that moment. Nothing in the universe ever
stops except the human politic, the human solution to this problem or
that. And when we stop, we fail. Stopping is the only unnatural thing
there is; every force in nature, every object in the universe is in
motion, changing, changing.…” His mind re-echoed Aquare’s almost
uninflected _What is right? Nothing_, he thought, _is right in all ways,
for always_. He was on his feet. “I’m going to the Big Chief.” And he
did, a bright-eyed black bullet, leaving a honey-haired technical
synthesist staring after him in astonishment.

And somewhere out in the blowing dusk that is daytime on Medea, on his
way back to his city, an Arcan brushed his hands together: _Chirp.
Chirp. Chirp-chirp_.

_Stop and let me be you_—the gesture of Acceptance—had yeasted through
the enclave by the time the Big Chief passed the word, the final word
that forever lubricated the dangerous friction between the factions. It
was—had been, rather—the secret of secrets, the psychological dynamite
that might well have blown the human colonies to fragments, blowing in
Medea’s treacherous winds, for arriving ships to find and wonder at. The
secret was simply that sterility was not the price of special aptitude,
that in the production of a Truform from normal human genes, sterility
was accomplished in one programmed operation in the DNA alteration and
the applied special aptitude in quite another. In other words, the
sterility was not at all necessary in the case of any individual, but it
was essential to all. For without it the new trait was heritable, and
the alteration of the gene pool was inevitable and unpredictable. To
maintain the special ties Medea felt toward the mother planet, the
possibility of a genuine alteration of species was unthinkable; so the
Truforms were simply not permitted to breed. Yet their every other human
attribute was preserved, for the sake of harmony on the colonies. It
seemed an obvious and simple solution, and it was just on the point of
failure when Dom Felix arrived. It must fail because it was an imposed
solution; any solution imposed on a segment of humanity must fail
eventually. Only government by consent of the governed can survive.

To explain this to the colonists at the outset might well have been
impossible: to have this knowledge freely given to an Accepting society
dissolved all tensions. To empathize, to feel with another’s fingertips,
and to see out through his eyes was the purpose of Acceptance and the
means to its ends.

And Dom Felix wrought his miracle in just under four Terran months. And
the Big Chief said to Dom Felix, “Now tackle the Arcans.”

“They’re just altogether goddam standoffish,” Altair II explained to Dom
Felix. “I can almost understand their not offering us anything they
have. But it just doesn’t make sense for them not to take anything we
offer. It would be all profit for them, no loss. We’ve designed ground
transportation for them, for example, protective side arms, boots to
keep them from being bitten by the wildlife around here. But no, there
they go, bare toes, on foot, at the mercy of these crazy winds and the
crazy bugs and beasties. Don’t think they gave us the winghouses. We
observed them, we copied them, we engineered them our own way. But they
never offered a thing.”

“What about that city of theirs? What do they do there?”

“Nothing! I mean, I really and truly kid you not. Nothing. First of all,
Arca is not a city. I’d call it some sort of a shrine if I thought for a
moment they had a religion or some sort of reverential philosophy, but
they haven’t, or, if they have, it’s not visible to the naked eye. What
do they do? Nothing! They sit around, that’s what they do. If you have a
chance to go there, don’t bother. Central can give you all the holo’s
you can take; if suicide is your hobby, you can bore yourself to death
with them. Nothing’s changed over there in the past century. They just
sit there—no talk, no music, no rituals, and certainly no fun and games.
No agriculture, no trade, no manufacturing. Every now and then a dozen
or so get up and leave, walk away single file up into the mountains.
Every now and then a dozen or so will walk back in. Whether they’re the
same ones or not, there’s no way of knowing. They don’t wear clothes or
decorations; so how can you tell who’s boss, or chief, or whatever? They
don’t use weapons, not even a pointed stick. They maintain Arca pretty
much by hand. I must admit, they can do a hell of a lot with hands like
those. And they just sit.”

“What about Aquare?”

“By now you know as much as anyone—maybe more. He’s spent more time with
you than he ever has with anyone. Maybe he’s some sort of freak. Maybe
he’s the only Arcan ever born who ever had a hobby, and we’re it. One
thing’s sure: he’s the only one who can talk to us, or ever did. You can
bet that as soon as we had that translator functioning we made more—over
a hundred. We thought it was a real breakthrough, that we’d hold
conferences, that we’d find specialists, that we had a short line to
their history and their culture and their science, if any, to say
nothing of their knowledge of the local wildlife.

“Well, forget it. We fixed up a harness for Aquare to tote some of ’em
back to Arca, and he just politely wouldn’t. ‘There is no need.’ That’s
all he would say about it. ‘There is no need.’ So we trundled them out
to Arca in a convoy of cycles. Tried to hand them out. The Arcans
wouldn’t take ’em. So we just had to pile them up and leave them there.
They just left them where we put them, till they got kicked around and
mostly lost. Bet there are still some lying around there.”

“What about Aquare?” Dom Felix asked again. “I’ve never really talked to
him about Medea or the Arcans. Maybe he has … by God, he has led the
conversation away from that. But there was always so much to talk about.
A kind of philosophy that, well, that I can touch but not grasp.”

“Oh. sure. I know just what you mean. But, hell, he isn’t human, and it
would be stupid to expect him to think like one.” Altair said. “But he’s
been no help whatever in the nuts-and-bolts of local flora or fauna or
weather or, damn it, anything. Big Chief we had before, he got so sore
about that that he locked Aquare out, forbade him the premises. Aquare
didn’t ask why then or ever, didn’t go away, stood out there in the wind
for weeks until the old chief relented and let him back in. And he
didn’t ask why then, either.” He shook his head. “But if you can make
that Acceptance trick work on the Arcans, there’s no end to the good it
will do. How long do you think it takes us to learn as much about Medea
as anyone of those hop-toads could tell us in a single hour of real
communication? Months, years, maybe.”

“And while you’re bringing diverse species together,” Altair added
abruptly, “see what you can do about Wallich. She and I used to fun
around a lot, and I don’t mind telling you, I miss her.”

“You don’t see her much?” Dom Felix was surprised, but then, he had been
busy.

“I don’t see her ever! Not since the day you were defrosted. She’s
around you all the time and doing her own work as well.”

“She’s been a great help. There’s something very special about her. I’d
give anything for her grasp of, well, of everything.”

Altair nodded. “A synthesist. She was sired by one, a Truform. Also a
synthesist. Designed for it. but I do believe she’s better than he was.
There’s only one head in this whole place that can compare with her, and
that’s your friend Kert Row. Seems kind of stupid, well, childish, you
know what I mean? But he is to technology what Wally is to theory. A
supergenius. It isn’t what they know, which is plenty. It’s how they
think.”

Dom Felix nodded. “It absolutely awes me. Well, if you like, I’ll sound
her out.”

“I wish you would. Truth is. I’m surprised at myself. Never knew I’d
miss her so much.”

Dom Felix went to Arca. He was wise enough (and experienced enough) to
understand that though the ultimate fruition of his mission was far in
the future, it was accomplished. He was wise enough also to separate
this observation from wishful thinking, and to trust that it was so. But
a man like Dom Felix cannot be stopped just because he is finished, and
the suggestions by the Big Chief (as an offhand whimsy) and by the
historian Altair II (as an excited and highly complimentary solid
suggestion) were enough to make Dom Felix realize that here was his
ultimate challenge, and he rose to it. To bring Acceptance, not only
between factions of humanity, not only between what seemed to be species
and subspecies of humanity, but actually between humanity and another
species entirely—this would be the achievement of his life.

He sat willingly, and then grimly, through endless hours of holo reports
on expeditions to Arca, going back 112 terrayears, and, indeed, Altair
II had been right when he said that nothing ever happens there. Once
there had been a seism and a rift that tore almost a third of the
central building away, and that created some interesting visuals as the
Arcans, virtually without tools but for simple levers and a sort of hod
with straps to carry materials, swarmed over the structure like
disturbed ants and repaired it with surprising speed. The commentary at
that point drew attention to something Dom Felix had already
noticed—that each individual seemed capable of doing any task with the
same degree of skill, and that all worked together with no apparent
direction from a leader. They made no sound but for increased breathing
when the load was heavy; there was no audible or visible signal from one
to the other. Ants, at least, stop and “greet” one another, touch
antennae. Bees “dance” to inform the hive. If the Arcans had an
equivalent, it was not (or not yet) detectible. When asked how they
communicated, or if not, how they could cooperate with out
communicating, Aquare droned, “There is no need,” through his
translator, and, as he did so often, would not be budged further.

And on two occasions the sensitive airfoils of a winghouse were not up
to the insane swirling of the Medean winds and the structure was
damaged. Twice—in a century. He saw the ground cycles of the Terran
expeditions arrive, and the Terrans exploring, testing, and trying
desperately to communicate with the passive Arcans, and failing two
years ago as they had failed repeatedly in the previous ninety. He saw
the translators offered, refused (ignored is a better word) piled up
and, on successive later viewings, gradually scattered and lost. And
Altair’s comment that nothing ever happens in Arca turned out to be only
too true. The main hall and its power had changed virtually not at all
since the first recordings. Outbuildings came and went, but not much. A
dozen or a score of Arcans would file out once in a while, and could be
seen trudging away into the mountains until the “thick light” obscured
them. A dozen or a score would file out of the mountains and into the
hall—whether or not they were the same ones there was no way of knowing.
There was no noticeable sex differentiation and there were no young.
“There is no need,” Aquare explained. (Explained?)

Until Dom Felix had absorbed all the information there was (and to do
that without spending a lifetime, he had to ask the computer to report
only changes and to delete all repetition) he kept his plans to himself,
and absorbed a part of his mind with devising ways and means to persuade
Aquare to guide him to Arca. Physical, geographical guidance was
unnecessary, and there would certainly be no resistance or interference
from the Arcans, but he liked to think he had formed some sort of bond
with the ubiquitous creature, and that he could expand if not exploit
it. Some of his plans were quite elaborate, starting with subtlety and
sidling into the suggestion that he visit Arca and that Aquare accompany
him. Many of them were scenarios of how the Arcan could be manipulated
into suggesting it himself, together with Dom Felix’s reluctance and
gradual persuasion. Always he encountered the difficulty of dealing with
the creature who thought quite as well as a human but not _like_ a
human. In the end he decided to start from the top, or the bottom, or
however one might describe irreducible directness, and he said,

“Aquare, I want to go to Arca and I want you to go with me.”

And Aquare performed the bubbly squeak which emerged from his translator
as “Yes.” Dom Felix, totally prepared and tensed for a long campaign of
trial and error, regrouping and flanking, almost physically stumbled,
like a man running up seven steps when the architect had put only six in
the flight. Ask him what it was he fell over.

Altair (after having said the inevitable “what the hell for?”) told him
he would have to start Aquare out first and drive out a couple of
terradays later, because no Arcan had ever agreed to ride on a cycle,
and the only alternative would be to hoof it with Aquare, which no human
in his right mind would attempt, not on Medea. Aquare, who was present
at this interchange, mumbled and squeaked and his translator said, “I
ride,” and it was Altair’s turned to fall over the step that wasn’t
there.

The cycle—and it was a new one, equipped with a stable platform Kert Row
had designed—required very little instruction. The route to Arca had
been scanned many times before, and was not only visible depicted on a
large screen, but was compared with the scanned reality as it traveled,
so that any change—a boulder on the path, for example, or an animal over
a certain size, or an Arcan pedestrian, would be noticed, alerted, and
avoided instantly and automatically. There was no speed control as such,
but a simple GO and STOP lever and on-off OPTIMUM button. With this in
the on position, speed was a safe balance between performance and
terrain. There were manual overrides for both speed and steering, but it
would be hard to imagine a situation in which they would be useful.

The machine was in constant communication with the enclave, not only
with the ever-ready voice transmitter, which, though it could be turned
off, would turn itself on again in even the slightest emergency, but
with a locator signal which had no override. It was powered by a battery
that, for surface travel, was virtually inexhaustible and that could
leap the machine for several days before it required recharging
sufficiently to leap again. The leaps, ten to twenty meters at a time,
were undertaken only when the vehicle’s computers decided they were safe
with all variables scanned: speed, slope, planned course, obstacles, and
especially the wind. The strange, surging gait of this machine had
become traditional in the enclave, even working its way into some love
poetry; it (the gait, not the poetry) was exhilarating to some Terrans,
soothing to others, and absolutely nauseating to a few. Kert Row’s
refinement had lessened all these phenomena. It had yet to work its way
into literature.

Two and a half days of foot-slogging for an Arcan equaled two and a half
hours for the cycle, and Dom Felix was surprised to find that his
burnoose was all the equipment he needed, and that departure time was
completely up to him, since the holo’s had informed him (and informed
and informed him) that the Arcans observed no special sleep time. He was
pleased at the discovery, although there was a child-like quantum of
disappointment in him that there were no safari-like preparations, no
crowds waving goodbye from the gate, or a delegation to travel the first
kilometer with them, no leis around their necks, nothing to speed them
on their way except (from three different sources) “Going to Arca? What
the hell for? Nothing ever happens at Arca.” They simply walked out of
the fifth corridor, the Rim of Pellucidar, battled their way across the
dusky, blustery compound to the motor pool where the cycle, with its
whispering gyros and its gleaming transparent canopy, awaited them. (It
was Dom Felix who battled. Aquare’s short flat fur was infinitely better
suited to the pluckings and grabbings of Medea’s whirling atmosphere
than a flapping burnoose.) The attendant waited until they had reached
the vehicle and had instructed Dom Felix to put one foot on the stirrup
before he activated the canopy. It slid back just far enough to permit
them to skin inside before it slammed shut, and even then it took half a
minute for it to pump out the dust that had whirled in with them. The
course chip had already been plugged in, and the screen was illuminated;
all Dom Felix had to do was to push the GO lever. As the machine wheeled
around to nose into the plotted course, he saw the attendant scurrying
back to the shelter; the fellow didn’t even wave. “Well,” he said
inanely, “here we go.” Aquare apparently did not feel that this called
for a response. They sat side by side in silence while the cycle
ascended and settled, slid and surged its sibilant way. They flashed
past the strident cool air of the Terran fields, a light so very
different from the many glows natural to Medea, and on into the shifting
dusk of the backcountry.

For a while Dom Felix attended to the passing scene, but it became an
effort; there is a sameness to the many differences in the topography of
Medea, and it is not easy even while standing still for Terran eyes to
take in detail. Bounding and sliding across and through it defeated the
hope of seeing a spectacular formation or a fleeing animal, and the
stable platform robbed the rush along a side-hill or the mounting of a
slope of its reality. The Terran eye is magnetized by brightness, and he
found himself paying more attention to the screen before him than to the
view outside; it was like looking at a line drawing of the Mona Lisa
instead of at the painting itself, and somehow, to his own irritation,
finding that more satisfactory.

He was aroused from these confusing thoughts by a touch on his shoulder,
and he turned to Aquare.

The Medean pointed his two long central fingers at the panel before him,
where a small plate glowed green. He made a slight stabbing motion
toward it. Dom Felix realized several things at once: first, that never,
not once, even by accident, had Aquare ever touched him; the contact on
his shoulder was so extraordinary that, light as it had been, and brief,
he still felt its residual. Second, the control he indicated was the
voice communicator to the enclave. Third, he was (also for the very
first time) conveying something with gestures rather than speaking
through his translator. Dom Felix quelled the reflex to blurt out a
question, and spread his hands: _What do you want?_

Again Aquare stabbed toward the green-glowing plate. Dom Felix reached
toward it—slowly, lest this not be what was meant—until he touched it.
It immediately turned red, with a diagonal line: by ancient tradition,
OFF.

“Aquar—” But before the whole name was out, the Medean shot out a
commanding hand, an unmistakable message. Don Felix shut up. To his
astonishment Aquare squatted on the deck in front of his feet and with
the powerful beak in the palm of his hand drew out a locking pin. A
panel came ajar; he opened it and reached inside. He did not fumble; he
seemed to know exactly what to do. There was a faint click, and he rose
up and sat back.

Dom Felix stared at him in utter astonishment. He had never seen Aquare
operate a machine or device of any kind, and nothing Wallich or Altair
had ever said about him hinted that he might have any comprehension of
one. Further, nothing in those endless holo’s had demonstrated tool use,
beyond the wedge and the lever, those powerful and flexible hands, and
whatever instinctive, possibly programmed genius for design it took to
build the winghouses (significantly, a single and repeated pattern) were
really no more remarkable than the nest of the bower-bird, or a beaver
dam, or a beehive. Yet here was Aquare, sitting back comfortably on the
cushioned seat, chirping his mirth and saying authoritatively, “Can talk
now. Automatic voice recorder also off.”

“Aquare, you … how … I never knew.…” Dom Felix stopped spluttering and
tried again. “Why didn’t you ever tell anyone that you—that you
could—knew how to …” He was spluttering again, so he stopped.

_Chirp-chirp-chirp_. “There was no need.”

“Oh for God’s sake, don’t do that to me.”

Aquare, quite relaxed, said nothing. He seemed to be waiting. Dom Felix
looked up at the red-lit communicator switch, at the panel still ajar
under the control board. _Can talk now_. Can talk without being
overheard, without being recorded. “What is it you want to tell me,
Aquare?”

Aquare turned toward him with his torso, averting his head, and again
Dom Felix had to remind itself that the native did not have binocular
vision. The turn of the body strangely intensified the feeling of being
totally observed. The gentle burbling and moaning came through the
translator as “You give confidence.”

“Thank you.” Something in Aquare’s stillness told him that this was not
quite right. He amended it. “If you mean what I think you mean—thank
you.”

“Not thank me. Wrong confidence.” It came haltingly; these were not
words, apparently, that Aquare had used before.

Wrong confidence. What then would the right confidence mean? Make
someone confident. Cheer someone up. Confidence … oh, the kind of
confidence you keep. “You mean, you have something to confide? That kind
of—”

“Yes. No.” A long pause. “I confide. You not talk.”

“Go ahead. I won’t interrupt.”

The lithe hands came up and together; the beaks clashed, once. Not chirp
this time—and this was another first; the very first time Aquare had
exhibited impatience. “Confidence,” he said at last. “I confide. You not
talk. Never. Never. Never.”

“Ah.” It came to him in a rush. “Can I keep a confidence! Is that what
you’re asking? If you tell me something in confidence, can you trust me?
Is that what you want to know? Is that why you—” he gestured, “—shut off
the communicator and the recorder?”

“Confidence, yes.”

“Well then. Aquare,” Dom Felix said devoutly, “I give you my faithful
word that whatever you say to me in confidence, I will never repeat to a
single living soul.”

“Soul.” It was probably a question.

“I will never repeat a confidence to any person in any way.”

“Never.”

“Never.”

Dom Felix set himself to receive revelations—shattering, amazing
revelations. He watched in new astonishment as Aquare slipped off the
seat, reached behind the panel, and turned on the recorder. He closed
the panel, slipped in the locking pin, and gestured to Dom Felix to turn
on the communicator. Dazed, Dom Felix did. (It was not until weeks later
that he learned that such controls would respond only to the human hand,
so designed that no falling object or carelessly placed cargo could
activate it by accident; and that the Medean hand would not affect this
type of switch. Just how much Terran technology did this creature
understand?) He sat there staring at his companion and underwent a whole
dizzying chain of reactions: disappointment, puzzlement, and when he
opened his mouth to demand more information, anger, for the green
listening glow of the communicator informed him that he could not do so
without breaking the confidence he had so devoutly given only a moment
before. Then admiration at the sheer skill of the Medean’s
manipulation—even though he had been its … subject? target?
victim?… overcame him, and he laughed. He laughed, and Aquare chirped,
and in good time they came to Arca.

The _holo’s_, Dom Felix thought, _are just too damn good_. He was by no
means the first to have that thought; it had been a common observation
and occasionally a battlecry for over a century before he left Terra.
Psychologists and educators had cried doom over that technological
refinement for a long time, lamenting the increasing tendency of Terrans
to lie personally dormant in the glow of their holo’s, vicariously
experiencing other places, other times for (sometimes) days at a time
while automatic machines fed and massaged and evacuated them. It was
argued on the one hand that the holo’s expanded the mind and multiplied
experience and understanding, and that as the artificial qualitatively
approached the real, the copy the original, it would effectively be no
difference at all, with the ultimate good on the side of the perfected
imitation, for it eliminated all the perils of real experience.

On the other hand there always had been, there always would be, a
portion of humanity which insisted upon its own real experience and was
willing to run risks and pay the price of potential scars, agony and
death. Or ridicule … the whole matter being yet another indication of
the effort of the human animal perennially to separate itself into
disagreeable factions, necessitating the existence of such movements as
Acceptance, which alone could prevent the species from stinging itself
to death by its own poison like the scorpion.

These thoughts trickled through his mind as he sat on the slightly
resilient floor with his back against the glossy, varnished wall of
Arca’s central building, the one with the aeronautical tower. Made
entirely of the same material, light, strong, and composed of particles
matted together in some way, the hall was bare of furniture of any kind.
Irregularly placed patches of luminescence, part of the wall itself,
glowed dimly, but there were so many that the light, at least on Medean
terms, was adequate, though for a Terran it took some getting used to.
Forty or so Arcans squatted against the walls or knelt or crouched out
on the floor. He saw none lying down. Occasionally one would rise and
leave, presumably to eat.

The entire structure thrummed as it yielded to the ever-shifting
pressures of the supporting wings, but due to the great size of the
enclosed space, the overall note was far down toward the subsonic, and
was felt rather than heard. There was also a perpetual susurrus, soft
and sourceless, the result probably of particulate matter being
constantly swept against and along the outside surfaces of the
structure, the sound, absorbed and diffuse, delayed and mixed. It was
like sitting inside a gigantic tympanum which was being energetically
bombarded by snowballs made of absorbent cotton. There was no other
sound, no speech, no song. There was no decoration, no art save for the
beautifully poised substructures of the roof, but that was not so much
art as engineering; a kind of visible logic, like the hexagonal form of
a honey cell.

And all this, in depth and detail, had surrounded him for days in his
research; he was completely familiar with every sight and sound and
texture, and the difference between a holo and the actuality was slight
indeed. It was this that brought up the thoughts of the function of
holography in Terran culture, and “Going to Arca? What the hell for?”

He found out what the hell for.

Aquare, seated beside him, whimpered and burped into the translator,
which said, “Food for you in cycle.” The almost-monotone sounded harsh
and loud in the big hall. No Arcan indicated any response.

“Thanks, Aquare. I know. I’m not hungry just now.”

“Sleep.” Damn it, thought Dom Felix, isn’t it within the state of the
art to design in some punctuation for that talk-box of his? _Sleep_.
Would that be imperative, interrogative, informational, abstract, or
something he hadn’t thought of yet? He took a chance and said, “I’m not
sleepy either.”

Aquare said, “Confidence.”

The scene in the cycle rushed back. “Absolutely, Aquare. You have my
word. You may trust me.”

“Trust. Yes.”

Silence again. How in time, thought Dom Felix, do you bring Acceptance
to people who can’t, or anyway don’t, communicate with you and can’t, or
don’t, or maybe don’t need to communicate with one another? They—

He gasped.

For perhaps fifteen seconds, he wasn’t there at all—not on Arca, nor on
Medea, nor anywhere else he had ever been or read about or been told
about or holo’d.

The sky was white, dazzling, bright all over and brighter still at the
distant horizon he faced. The ground was splintered rock, grays and
browns nearby, smoky with distance as it receded. The land was treeless,
and he grew on a high bluff, yearning toward the brightening horizon.
All around them was a tinkling as the freezing wind, the good chill
wind, moved his leaves and those of the other red-leaf, blue-vein plants
around him. All bent toward the growing light, and spread. With a
glorious flash the limb of the sun appeared, and as it rose it was very
pale orange and its limb was enormous, a widening arc, huge and close
and generous, profligate with the good, needed, orange light, pouring
out across the prairie and shooting ahead of it long sharp shards and
spears of shadow.

The ground shook and he was aware of the great creature which
approached—an armored slug with many pairs of legs and heavy feet, and
low-slung horizontal mandibles mowing across the crest of the bluff. It
caught the red leaves, helpless in their starving dawn-time extension,
and fed as it moved, scalping a swath out of the gravelly ground. He
knew he was in its path; flight never occurred to his plant self, fear
hardly at all, for fear was simply unreasonable. When the jaws closed on
him there was regret, and oh yes, agony for a moment, and something
else:

Acceptance.

Dom Felix tried to open his eyes and could not: he had not yet closed
them. He began to pant, clawed for a moment at the floor and each side,
started up away from the wall, and then had to pull down his cowl to
wipe the sweat that poured down into his eyes. “What was that?”

Wordlessly, Aquare pointed to an Arcan hunkered against the wall to the
right.

“I don’t understand.”

“Try.”

 … and he was weightless … no, free was a better word, riding warm wind.
He looked ahead and saw others of his kind with wide curved wings and
white, clean bodies. He looked down a thousand meters to a sparkling
blue sea speckled with whipped foam. He looked across to his left and
saw long line of birds like himself, eleven of them, and understood that
they were flying in a V formation, strong and easy, somewhere to go,
everything right.

He blinked, and was back in Arca.

Shaken, he said, “And they said nothing ever happens in Arca,” and tried
to laugh.

_Chirp-chirp-chirp_. The sound was strange there; none of the others did
it.

“Aquare—please.”

Aquare averted his strange head to look at Dom Felix. He said, “Come
with me.” But when Dom Felix started up, he stayed with the gesture, sat
him back down.

 … and they moved through a landscape, the Medean badlands, down from a
mountaintop into a pocket canyon with a crooked little lake at the
bottom. It was heavily overgrown with low shrubs of many kinds and
long-limbed, reaching trees. The wind was rather more merciful here in
the sheltered valley, and it was easier to see without the perpetual
whirl of dust-devils and shrouding clouds that plagued the coastal
plains of the Ring Ocean. Dom Felix was Dom Felix now, not a plant or
bird; he sensed the presence of Aquare beside him and was aware
surprisingly without surprise, but they were both invisible to one
another, and to whatever, whomever, might be in the valley to see.

An animal was snuffling into a bush, whether to browse or to hunt, Dom
Felix could not be sure. It was somewhat larger than a Terran fox; it
was six—no, eight-legged, with the segmented body covered with fine red
fur. As it backed out of the underbrush, Dom Felix could see two small
limbs hanging from the base of the neck, which was upthrust like the
neck of a llama; the limbs were smaller and more slender than the legs,
rather like the forelimbs of a kangaroo.

As they watched, another animal of the same species—or was it? It was
larger, with longer forelimbs equipped with clawlike fingers, and—yes,
it had only four legs and a short, straight, thick tail; a sort of
centaur; this creature, without preliminaries, flung itself on the back
of the first, digging its claws into the front of the first body
segment, and began to copulate enthusiastically. Ah. Male with four
legs, female with eight.

Everything seemed to mist over, and return again to clarity. A very
small portion of Dom Felix’s mind was amazed at this combination within
him of intense observation and uncritical acceptance. _Watch now, think
later_.

There was a change in the Valley, probably seasonal, part of the complex
gumbo of Medean weathers to which, as in all of its kind, the vegetation
had learned to accommodate. Bushes seen before were now leafless; new
vines were rioting up the trees, which had dressed themselves for some
new occasion. Clearly some time had passed.

Again he saw the two animals. The male hovered alertly near her. She had
changed distinctively. Her hindquarters had blown up grossly, and the
last pair of legs seemed barely able to support them, and had lost some
of their mobility, so that they dragged rather than lifted. She seemed
fairly unconcerned as she rooted among the underbrush.

Suddenly the male spun about and froze, alert, his forelimbs up and its
claws splayed way some crabs alert for danger. Down the slope toward him
galloped a second male, ready apparently to crash straight into the
first. At the last possible instant he swerved, lashing out with his
right hind foot with a blow that would have disemboweled the other had
it landed. But the animal guarding the female twisted deftly, avoiding
the foot, and struck out with the forelimb, which seemed somehow to
reach much farther than it should, and the taloned paw (hand?) struck
the other a terrible blow in the back of the long neck, which, with the
invader’s downslope speed, serve to somersault him down the hill, to
land sprawling and sliding. He got painfully to his feet and started
back up, but the sight of the other standing there unscathed, his
forelimbs out and fairly quivering with eager readiness, apparently made
him think again. He stopped, pulled a leaf off of a bush, put it in his
mouth, chewed for a moment, then turned and trotted away.

The other turned back to the female, who had regarded this knightly
conflict with dull disinterest. She had other concerns. Her heavy
hindquarters had collapsed the spindly legs, and she was numbly dragging
it along the ground. Dom Felix felt an urge to help her, to stop her, to
keep her from injuring herself, but he was invisible, he wasn’t really
there, was he?

Very concerned, he watched the stretching in the last body section, down
in the groove between it and the next; and he saw it split and bleed.
The female kept dragging it laboriously along the ground, now headed
toward the thicker underbrush, the male following watchfully. She
stopped at last, rested, and then suddenly lunged. The entire back
portion broke almost entirely away, except for the end of the spine.
Another lunge, and she was free of it altogether. It lay there under the
bushes, the little legs twitching. Surprisingly, there was not a great
deal of blood.

The female stood panting, ignoring what lay under the bush, and Don
Felix was horrified to see the male immediately fling himself upon her
again, forelimbs and four legs holding her immobile while he penetrated
her somewhere in the center of what seem more like a wound than anything
else. He was soon finished and flung himself off, to go and stand by the
discarded thing lying in the leaves. The female moved off, beginning to
snuffle for food again; the male gave her not a glance.

Again the scene misted over and cleared. Obviously, time had passed
again. The male had trodden much of the nearby ground, as if in restless
pacing, and the thing under the bush had undergone changes. It was
smaller overall, much of the excess fat gone from it. It was obviously
still alive, though the legs had atrophied to crooked little sticks.
They quivered, and now and again gave little convulsive jerks. The male
approached it, staring intensely in its sideways way, and was apparently
preoccupied when the attack came.

The second male (whether it was the one he had seen before or not, Dom
Felix could not be sure) exploded on the scene as if from nowhere,
landing on the first one’s back and driving in a veritable blur of blows
to the upright portion of the neck. The defender immediately fell and
rolled over, dislodging the attacker. He gathered his forefeet under
them and leapt straight up, to come down with fearful accuracy on the
attacker’s head. Two strong kicks finished the job. He sank down,
panting, to rest for a moment and then crouched over the corpse. With a
series of blows with the hard spurs in the center of his forelimbs, he
cracked a line of cavitations along the crest of the skull, the way one
might chip a line in a block of ice preparatory to cracking it in two.
It was done with such expertise it appeared to be an old skill, or
insect-like pre-programming. He then forced the long finger-like claws
of both hands into the crack and strained. With a snap the skull open
like a book, and he plunged his face into it, gobbling.

Meanwhile the thing under the bush began to convulse in earnest, so much
so that it actually turned over. One area of it—the half-healed,
half-withered place where the spine had torn out—showed some agitation,
and suddenly a sharp little probe appear from inside, followed by a
second. These two whipped in toward the flesh, paused, trembling,
whipped and tore again, until it could be seen that something was
fighting its way out. As it gradually emerged and freed itself from the
entanglements of what had to be the uterus, Dom Felix saw it to be a
startlingly perfect miniature of the first female he had seen, with
eight legs and two forelimbs with sharp little claws on them—the tools
of its first emergence.

The male, blood and brains dripping from his long snout, stood over
the—baby?—until it was almost out, and patiently pulled it the rest of
the way. From the center of the abdomen, between the second pair of
legs, extended a vein, or tube—clearly the umbilical cord. This he
grasped in his long fingers and broke. The infant began to crawl, and in
minutes, to lift its segmented body clear of the ground and walk. It
waddled blindly over to the shelter of the nearest bush and began poking
its snout into the leaves, trying to feed. The male grasped the cord
from the ruin that was left from the birth, drew out a wrinkled,
fist-size many-veined tissue, the afterbirth or true uterus. This he
immediately devoured, and went his way.

Dom Felix followed him, shocked, nauseated, and fascinated. There may
have been another swift misting; he could not be sure, but it seemed now
to be a different and lower part of the valley, the lake nearer, the
mountain shouldering higher. The male approached the same female he had
seen before, dropping her rear segment; Dom Felix knew because she had
only six legs, not eight. She was in the throes of dropping the last
segment again.… _Aquare, do I have to go through this whole thing
again?_

Apparently not; the scene misted and cleared, with just a glimpse of the
male gulping down the afterbirth and the infant crawling away to the
nearest shadows. Dom Felix found himself following the now quadrupedal
female, apparently not at all the worse for wear, beginning to rear and
cavort and leap like a young goat, for no reason at all except for the
joy of it. It took very little time for him to observe that this was
female no longer, but a young, strong, immature, four-legged male.

The mist, and again the view of the adult male. He seemed to be having
trouble keeping a steady gait as he trotted along the flat rock of the
streambed above the lake. Suddenly he fell, tried to rise, could not. He
lay for a while, gathering strength, and then twisted himself and began
furiously attacking his own haunches as of plagued by absolutely
intolerable itch. Twice he stopped to rest and shift his body so he
could attack it again, when by an unbelievable twist and a spastic
wrench he literally tore off his own useless hindquarters. He fell back,
gasping, now a biped with the spine now a long tail; and the dead
hindquarters unmistakably carried with them the male organs.

At length the creature got to its feet, took a few tottering steps and
but for a quick stoop and a touch on the ground with one of the wiry
forelimbs, would have fallen. It tried again, with a little more
success, and very soon was walking almost upright—weakly, certainly, but
with increasing certainty.

The mist: then a mature, bipedal adult, perched on a rock, staring off
into the distance. Under the rock, another, contemplatively chewing on a
melon-like fruit. A third, poking along a stream-bed apparently looking
for whatever might be edible there. A young adult male emerged from the
undergrowth and stood on the bank looking at the biped and licking his
lips. The biped slowly raised both forelimbs and covered its head with
them, upon which the others, on and around the big rock, came down,
moving carefully and steadily, to gather around the one in the stream.
The male stared at them, they stared back, and then the male reared,
turned and trotted off. The bipeds watched him go, and then went back to
their contemplations.

The mist, then Arca.

How long had it taken? Dom Felix had no chronometer with him; there was
one out in the cycle, but he was not moved to go for it. Judging by the
indices of hunger and thirst, he felt no more and no less than he had
when that first vision exploded on him. “Aquare, what are you doing?”

“Answering.”

Answering what? He hadn’t asked anything. “Yes you ask,” rasped the
translator. “From defrost you ask, all day, all time.”

Then “Aquare! I didn’t say anything! Can you read my mind?”

“Do not know read.”

“Do you know what I’m thinking when I don’t talk?”

“Confidence.”

Dom Felix was a little nettled at this. “I have promised and I’ll stick
to it. Do you know what I’m thinking?”

Aquare droned: “Filthy little cannibalistic vermin. Also how the hell.
Also what is he doing to me fear.”

“Should I fear?”

“Is no should. It is only is.”

With a touch of exasperation, Dom Felix rephrased it. “Did you—do you
intend to do me any harm?”

“No harm. It may be hurt. Just truth.”

“The truth cannot hurt,” said Dom Felix triumphantly.

_Chirp-chirp-chirp_.

“Not with Acceptance, it can’t,” said Dom Felix in his Q.E.D. tone.

“Filthy little cannibalistic vermin is acceptance.”

Dom Felix suspected, and rightly, a question mark on that one. “Aquare,
I make no moral judgments on animal behavior. I do reserve the right to
express disgust at what I find disgusting. You still haven’t told me how
you do this, what those—those pictures are.”

“All sentient intelligences can do.”

“Well, I can’t.”

Aquare said nothing. The nothing lasted a long time, and the more Dom
Felix replayed that interchange, the more flustered he became. He did
what he was trained to do: he confronted. “I think you just said I am
not a sentient intelligence.”

“Yet.”

“I can learn it, then. Here? From you?”

“Good.”

Steaming, Dom Felix thought his thoughts.

“Not arrogance. Truth,” responded the Medean, just as if Dom Felix had
spoken aloud.

This could get to be a real nuisance. Hastening to safer ground: “What
were those—uh—pictures I saw, the place with the white sky, the one with
the birds?”

“Not pictures. Is real.”

“Somewhere on Medea?”

“Not on Medea.”

“The birds, that sea—that looked like Terra.”

“Is Terra.”

“How long ago?”

“Is now.… You don’t believe.”

“Of course I don’t. It takes a beam of light fifty terrayears to travel
that far!”

“This not light. This is now.”

It was at this moment that the Receiver was born.

“Can you show me Terra again—Terra now?”

With one sweep of his head, Aquare scanned the entire chamber. “No one
is being on Terra now.”

_I thought not_. Wishing he could retract the thought, Dom Felix said,
“I’d like you to explain that.”

“This is place of reward. Arcans safe here. Arcans come, sit, be far
places. Be any sentient intelligence, anywhere, now.” Sensing Dom
Felix’s perplexity he apparently decided to expand. “Reward,” he said
again. “Difficult life. Near end, come here, sit, be anywhere. Enough,
go back, end.”

A sort of shrine, retreat. He had the exasperating sense of almost
understanding. “Aquare, why are you telling me this—me, when you have
told no one else?”

In answer, Aquare mimicked the Acceptance gesture, hand on hand, hands
raised, head bowed. It looked very strange when he did it. “You have
Acceptance idea. You say, be him. Be her. Be some other. One step away,
Be bird on Terra. Be plant on white-sky place, no have name. I say
before, maybe you very very great Terran. Maybe you most great Terran.
Maybe you make all Terrans be any sentient intelligence anywhere, now.”

“I’m sorry: I have to take this very slowly. You can teach me to live
as—to be some other creature, see and feel what they are seeing and
feeling right now, instantaneously? And then I could teach it to anyone
else?”

“If you very great Terran. Yes. If no, no.”

“You’re not teaching me—you’re testing me!”

“Both.”

“Go ahead then. I have to tell you—I’m damn interested but I’m not
convinced.”

“You want see more—” the final word was not a word, but the flash of the
picture—the quadruped male.

“Lord, no. I’ve had enough of that. Why did you give me that … that
natural history lesson anyway?”

The answer came in pictures: the naked Terran, then, beside it, a child.
No, not a child, a tiny, stooped, spindly, hairy humanoid, like—not
like, it _was_ Australopithecus. The “dawn man.”

The figures remained. Beside them, an Arcan, perhaps Aquare himself, and
beside it, the small, long-snouted, long-tailed Medean biped. The
pictures held, obscuring all else, until it came to Dom Felix: “You’re
descended from that—that creature!”

The pictures faded, and Dom Felix rubbed his eyes, though it had not
been with his eyes that he had seen them. Oh, my God, _filthy little
cannibalistic vermin_. He said sincerely, “Aquare, I _am_ sorry. I
couldn’t be sorrier. I—I’m sure Australopithecus had some pretty awful
habits too.” He made the gesture.

He thought Aquare was about to return it but it was something else—the
long fingers pointed across the hall to a squatting Arcan against the
far wall. “Is Terra.”

Dom Felix’s vision was swept away before it could cross the room, to be
replaced by that extraordinary sense of being …

 … of being strong and swift and perfectly adapted, and imbued with a
sense of health and joy surpassing anything he had ever known. Sleek,
streamlined, moving as if choreographed in the best of company: see them
curving up out of water and swimming in air, the friends, the lovers,
with their permanent smiles and their radiation of joy. This, however,
was infinitely more than the ineffable rightness of red leaves in a
white sky and the good hunger for pale orange light, more than climbing
the wind on the way to a home-calling. A dolphin is more than a plant or
bird; a dolphin lives in more than speed and foam and joyfulness. To the
five senses add a dozen more, some even now without names; touch and
speak with them, live in them, weave them to intricacies beyond human
comprehension. No living thing exists more immediately, more intimately
with its here and its now than the dolphin; few are in closer contact
with that timeless and continuing Self which appears dimly and
flickering in some humans as what it is called ‘racial memory’, but
which is, in the dolphin, a total presence. In that sense all dolphins
are one dolphin, and have been ever since, by conscious decision, and
for good reasons, they returned to the sea from their evolutionary
adolescence on shore.

The “allness” of all dolphins in space and time, is an analog and a
microcosm of the unity of sentience throughout the universe. High
evolutionary development is not a certification of membership in this
unity; far and away most of its elements are no more advanced than the
veined red foliage of the world of the white sky, yet have and permit
access to other sentience from anywhere. Because of this, red plant and
joyous dolphin share one basic: the fusion with this great Unity is
prime, and individual self-survival is secondary. A dolphin will fight
to the death to free itself from the net, but when the death comes, it
is a little more importance than the loss of dead skin-cells from the
greater body—to itself or to others of its kind. What it had when it was
an individual was shared. When the individual is no more, the sharing
endures and is immortal.

Much of this—because there is so much—escaped Dom Felix’s grasp, but
would leave its mark on him permanently. What overrode it was the sight
of the city.

The city nestled in a small deep cove flanked by pillars of rock—a huge
one on the north side and a much taller, slender spire on the south.
Most of the city was white, and conforming architecture with curved
walls and slightly domed roofs, and overlooking it, perched on the
cliffs which formed the backdrop to the town were linked white
buildings—nine of them.

Dom Felix knew that city intimately—had lived much of his Terran life in
it, had involved himself deeply in its designed growth—most particularly
in the chain of buildings atop the clips. The Research Center, and
Acceptance Headquarters. There was certainly no mistaking it; the city
was unique on all Terra. What filled him with astonishment and
incredulity was that there, real and gleaming and complete, and, in
addition, with that weathered look of something established and used
rather than band-box new, were nine buildings—nine, when he had, on
departure, said his farewells to four, some design plans, and some
graded ground-plans which would take half a careful century to complete.

He had given credence to these overwhelming Arcan experiences, and was
aware of very little doubt as to the reality of these wonders, or that
they might be other than what Aquare said they were. What he now saw in
his dolphin self was something that can hardly be a dolphin’s concern,
but was monumentally his: the projected construction on the cliffs was
now complete, had been completed during the fifty-one years of his
passage to Medea.

Therefore he was, he really was, looking at Terra now; he was looking at
a faster-than-light transmission.

Humanity has always responded to that spur. Prove that anything can be
done, and humanity will find a way to do it, even if that way is not the
same way. Witness the Terran winghouses. Witness man’s flight: man
learned that he could not fly like the birds, but he found a way to
fly—and that way was higher and faster.

(But … always higher and faster?)

City and sea faded; the high arc of the dolphin’s leap in its multiplied
awareness left him suspended in Arca, overwhelmed—so much so that when
Aquare spoke to him twice without a response, he relaxed in the typical
timeless stillness of Arcan meditation, ready to wait for however long
it might take.

Dom Felix rose from his own depths at length, and said, “I need to know
more.” Simple words, with layer upon underlayer of inspiration, urgency,
fascination, and successive explosions of planning.

“Yes.”

Vision upon vision, with the swift partitions of mists between them:

Arcans, single file, toiling through the badlands toward the mountains.

The Entry (not an Arcan word; the Arcans have no words)—not so much a
cave-mouth or doorway but a myriad of overhangs, cavities, entrances
which soaked up the pilgrims like a thread of water falling on a sponge.

Underground (of course underground! Would not a high culture, but a
non-technological culture, find for itself some environment of
continuity, not subject to the hellish attacks of Medean weather? And of
course the Terran enclaves, preoccupied with their own survival, were as
yet unaware of it!)—underground, the city, the country of the Arcans.
Here was their agriculture (largely fungoid) and their animal husbandry,
caged and corralled creatures of great variety, feed and excreta neatly
sequenced through the farming, or its analogs. Here was their industry,
such as it was, tools being hands and pincers, powerful limbs, sheer
numbers, and that strange ability, uncaptained, to team—to move in
concert or individually with near-perfect synchronization. It was
largely a silent city, completely nonverbal, for they apparently had
something better—something, at least, better for them; and they had as
little use for machines as they had for words.

Here were the young and the females—and an explanation for the almost
total similarity of all the Arcans Dom Felix had yet seen. The
inhabitants were anything but similar to one another. The infants had
ten appendages, and so had all the young until adolescence. Dom Felix
was led to many scenes of regularization, organization, and ritual, most
of which he could not begin to understand, but which he could
acknowledge as their schools, their religious institutions, and their
conventions. He saw no hospitals, and few injured or maimed individuals,
though once or twice a damaged or even amputated part obviously healing,
even regenerating. It occurred to him that a species evolved from those
creatures he had seen in the pocket-valley, promethean as they were,
undergoing successive metamorphoses in each single lifetime, may well
have regenerative abilities. As far sicknesses were concerned—anything
that survived on Medea was by that definition a prime survival type, and
anything that had not killed them off by now, could not.

He saw courtship, and the choosings—a far cry from the coarse brutality
of the couplings of the primitives; and once he was aware of those, he
had to notice that only six-legged females were so wooed.

He began to recognize something akin to a family grouping; a
centaur-like male, a six-legged female, an infant. Sometimes there were
two males, one invariably older than the other.

When familiarity began to replace curiosity and confusion, Dom Felix was
introduced to the more intimate and—could one say “sacred?”—aspects of
the city’s life.

He saw the metamorphoses, each surrounded by gentle ritual: the first
birthing, which apparently changed the child into the marriageable
female, and its two phases, the parting of the last body-segment, and
the care and guarding it went through until its moment came and it
delivered, witnessed in joy by the entire “family,” and (ritual echoing
of a far-past biology) the delivery of the afterbirth to the male. Then
the second birthing, which changed bride into male centaur, and the
delivery of this afterbirth to the father of the new child.

Then the ritual of departure for the new centaur, no longer wife and
mother, now single and free and male and ready to seek a wife.

And at last the ordeal of final metamorphosis—the separation of the male
segment of the centaur, and the appearance of the Arcan bipeds known to
Terrans—the totally mature, the completed.

It crossed Dom Felix’s mind that this was a treasure trove—that the
likes of Altair II, anthropologists, comparative culturologists, would
give anything in life to be able to study these people. The word
“confidence” intruded so immediately and so forcefully on his reverie
that he was snapped back to his presence in Arca, with Aquare beside
him, and it frightened him. He looked at the impassive figure, fervently
wishing that the Medean was capable of some sort of expression, of body
language, of some way of coloring his flat messages, but there was none
except for the feeling within Dom Felix that the creature was
angry—angry at even the beginnings of the thought that the confidence
might be violated.

No words passed at that point; Dom Felix’s regret at his own half-formed
thought, and the devout renewal of his promise, were sufficient.
Or—perhaps Aquare needed the reinforcement, not because of the wayward
thought, but for the revelations he was about to make.

The visions resumed.

There was a gathering of the bipeds, the Arcans he had known, and how
the population watched the procession toward the place Dom Felix had
called Entry. The bipeds filed through the entire city, with their arms
strangely held with the forearms resting on their heads (where had he
seen that before?) until they emerged on their way to the shrine, when
they took them down.

There was the first copulation, performed on the maturing child by the
head of the household, the centaur.

There was the solemn ingestion, after the first child was born, of the
afterbirth by the father.

There was a similar ritual by the female’s mate after the second birth.

And then, and then … and then there was the return pilgrimage to the
city.…

Dom Felix once read an account of the Parsis, or Parsees, an East Indian
sect, written toward the end of the first millennium. They were a highly
cultured people, and many of them traveled to other countries and
achieved high places in government and industry. And no Orthodox Parsi
failed to plan his life and his affairs otherwise than to return home to
die, or failed to make arrangements to have his body return should he
die abroad. No Parsi escaped the curious, the intrusive, the impolite,
the polite questioning about the details of a Parsi funeral, nor was
unaware of the distaste, even horror, that these details evoked in other
lands. No Parsi was so cultured, so civilized, so excellent in all his
accomplishments nor so polished in his manners that he could eliminate
this pall on his presence; the matter was certain to emerge soon or
later, and certainly more than once.

And this was the manner of a Parsi funeral: after the final services,
the body was wrapped in cloth and laid on a litter and born to a great
stone tower, cylindrical, with no roof. The bearers would unlock and
open a door at the bottom, carry their burden through a welter of broken
dry bones to center of the enclosure, set it down and leave as quickly
as they possibly could.

At the approach of the funeral procession, the vultures began to clutter
the sky, coming from everywhere to the tower, where they perched on the
wall, more and more of them, fighting for places, wheeling and darting
when at last there were none. And when the bearers left, the signal of
the slam of the lower door sent the birds out, scores of them, sometimes
hundreds, plummeting down the stone chimney in a screaming storm, to
tear and devour the corpse in minutes.

Witnessing the procession of returning pilgrims from Arca, and the
waiting population that silently met them, Dom Felix was forcefully
reminded of the Parsi rites. For when they were all within the city,
walking steadily and sedately in single file, this time without the
strangely defensive placement of forearms on heads, there was—must have
been—some silent signal, for the Medeans, one and all, of all ages and
degrees of maturity, surged forward and fell on the pilgrims; but for
the silence, it was, to Dom Felix’s mind, the same as the swoop of the
Parsi’s vultures. In moments the pilgrims were struck down, their heads
cracked, their skulls torn open, and their brains scooped out and gulped
down. The larger and stronger brought dripping handfuls to the smaller
and weaker, until every individual had had some part. Then the corpses
were taken up and carried away to be mulched and returned to the soil of
the agricultural sections.

“God! Oh, my dear God …” Dom Felix fell back on an old chant, to keep
his feelings under rein until he could control them again. How much of
them could be divined by the impassive Medean, he could not know.

“Can Acceptance accept,” said Aquare at length. Clearly, a question.

“Well, of course. Acceptance makes no judgments, especially on ani—I
mean, other-species behavior.… Aquare, why do you—did they kill the
pilgrims, the old ones?”

“For last sharing.”

“I don’t understand that.”

“You have see now all of us life, what we do, how we do.”

“But not why, Aquare.”

“Could be you not want why. Could be you know why, not want know.”

“There is nothing I don’t want to know!” Said Dom Felix, heatedly. “Now
tell me: why were the old ones killed like that? What is the last
sharing?”

To make later the—” (Flash of high flight, flash of red leaves under
white sky.) “also the—” (Flash of reverent removal of an afterbirth,
raising it to the lips of a centaur.) “together, give the seeing.”

“I’m trying hard to understand. Are you telling me that by eating the
brains of your own kind, and by doing the same with an afterbirth, you
can gain that power—to project visions, to see anywhere faster than
light can go?”

“That is how. You also.”

“What you mean, me also?”

“Not so well perhaps. But can share from others.” Apparently sensing Dom
Felix’s perplexity, Aquare went on: “You eat brain of music man, you
make better music. You eat afterbirth painter woman, you paint more
good.”

“Nonsense!”

“Not nonsense. I talked Terrans many-much, long time, little with one,
little another, much much Altair. Terran can have see-far like Arcan,
like many more many else place. Terran always say no, turn away. Terran
see _sadhu_—is right, _sadhu?_”

“Holy man,” nodded Dom Felix.

“Terran see _sadhu, sadhu_ have see-far, Terran say nonsense. Terran
make medicine, medicine give see-far, Terran forbid take medicine, make
medicine, study-learned medicine.”

“You’ve been talking to Altair, all right. I think you mean drugs,
especially mind-altering drugs. They were regarded as dangerous—well,
they _were_ dangerous. So they were withdrawn, and research was stopped.
But I don’t see—”

“Terran find other Terran eat Terran. Make stop.”

“Cannibalism! Of course we stop it!”

“No animal Medea, no animal Terra stop it. All eat kind but you kind.
You breed sister.”

Dom Felix did not have a sister, almost said so, then realize Aquare’s
words were not a statement, but a question. “Would I mate with my
sister? Certainly not.”

“All animal Terra, all Medea, mate sister, daughter. All animal Terrans
make for eat, make for work, Terrans breed sister-brother,
father-daughter.”

“And you are telling me that if Terrans committed incest and
cannibalism, they would have the—the see-far?”

“Yes.”

“Then,” said Dom Felix triumphantly, “why don’t our pigs and horses and
tropical fish and cats and dogs have it?”

And Aquare intoned, “Many do.”

How to dead-end an argument, thought Dom Felix. He tried another tack.
“Aquare, you haven’t answered my question. About the old pilgrims.”

“Yes I answer. You want answer more. Yes. You see Arcan born, eight
legs, two arms. Is female. Make one young, drop last legs. Make one more
young. Drop two legs. Is male. Soon mate, one, two, more times. Drop two
legs. Is no more male. Is no more female. Is Arcan. In brain is self of
all life, female self, mother self, woman-love self, male self,
male-love self. In brain is all selfs of past Medean before. Now is
Arcan, come to time of reward. Come Arca. Now after life of change,
change, now no change, now rest. Now stay still, see-far to here-place,
there-place. Each Arcan sometime find new place, share, share. Time
comes to die. Old now. One more share to do. Go home. Last share.”

“Do they always make it back, the old ones? Suppose they die on the
way?”

“All share.”

All share. Dom Felix could imagine it—the old Arcans gathering around a
dying one on the trail, cracking the skull, slurping the brains,
throwing the carcass off the trail.

“Acceptance.”

“If that was a question—of course Acceptance applies—acceptance of all
you are and what you do. Do you doubt it?”

“Acceptance accepts Medean.”

Dom Felix understood completely, and deliberately refused to respond to
it. With great precision, Aquare had nailed the fact that Terra would
not, probably could not, accept these practices for itself, no matter
what the reward.

He had forgotten that speech was his convenience, not Aquare’s, and was
not necessary to the Medean, who knew perfectly well what he thought and
felt.

Aquare rose, and Dom Felix rose with them. Aquare said, “Arca here to be
near Terrans. Be near, Aquare go to Terrans. Hope join Terrans in the
see-far, hope Terrans learn joint sentience everywhere. No hope. No
hope. Then come you. Is hope. Acceptance say all learn feel like all. I
be you. I be you young old male female big little, anything. Is hope. Is
hope. I bring you Arca, tell everything. You not most great Terran. You
not great Terran. You only one more Terran. Is no hope. No hope.”

“Ask Altair why dolphins never bite.” And he took off his translator and
threw it on the floor.

And Dom Felix stood for a long time after Aquare sat down against the
wall, and spoke to him, and shouted at him, and picked up the translator
and thrust it at him, but none of it made a difference; Aquare, like the
rest of the Arcans, just sat. So Dom Felix returned to the enclave
alone, to discover Wallich was pregnant with his child.

Altair II was a very old man to when the transfax writer got him by
receiver from Terra. The historian was quavery and rambly, with
occasional flashes of his wit and his ability to flip out aphorisms, but
the writer, named Trudi, had him on hold for more than a week and got an
amusing, though possibly inaccurate story out of him. Since
entertainment scores higher than accuracy, however, there was no
permanent harm from that; there seldom has been in the writing of
history. Which actually is one of old Altair’s own aphorisms.

The reason Trudi made the effort to find Altair to and speak to him is
that she had learned somewhere that he was the only man still alive who
had actually known Dom Felix. How he had survived so very long had a
great deal to do with Dom Felix; he, Altair, was a Double Tripper.
Double Tripping was a privilege accorded long-term Terran settlers or
their immediate children, should they wish to cease their subjective
lives at a certain point and resume them a century or so later. This was
done, if there was available space, by Tripping back to Terra in
biostasis, but instead of being defrosted there, being stored until the
next ships departed, and returning to Medea. Which Altair did, and lived
a long life afterward.

Why? It had a lot to do with Dom Felix. There are other reasons, of
course, but even those lead to Dom Felix. “Funny little fellow,” he told
Trudi. “Crazy, of course. Not crazy, maybe—obsessed. Nothing wrong with
that. All the movers and shakers of history have been obsessives.
Reasonable people who can see both sides of questions cancel themselves
out. One thing he did for me—he straightened me out. I’d been soaking
myself for so long in the past that I had forgotten that the present is
history too, and it pays to keep your eye on it. Now I’m a Double
Tripper with a lot of years to boot and the present I had is now
everybody’s history, even mine. Heh!”

“About Dom Felix—” Trudi nudged gently.

“Well, you see, he’s why I Double-Tripped. I mean, I had to know—you see
that, don’t you? How could a historian not know a thing like that?”

“A thing like what?”

“What happened to him! I mean, a man comes to the planet, solves an
insoluble social problem, solves an insoluble technical problem, changes
the history of the whole human species and probably a lot of others
along with it, then goes back to Terra and what? And what? Never another
word about him, anywhere. A historian can’t hold still for that!”

“All right,” said Trudi to get this out of the way, to get on with her
main thrust. “All right then, what did happen to him?”

“According to the transcript I had tucked into my freeze-bottle when I
went back, very little. I mean, a lot, but very little that explains
anything. He joined the Brothers of Shame.”

“What is ‘shame’?” Trudi wondered.

“It’s like guilt. He took an oath of silence and never wrote or said
another word. The Brothers devote themselves to meditating on their
sinfulness. Spend their lives at it and die inside the walls without
even a death record. That’s what he did and I’ll never know why.”

“Ah,” said Trudi, unable to think of anything else. Then: “You were
going to tell me how he invented the Receiver.”

“Yeh. Yeh. He came back from Arca, I was down at the cycle pool when he
came in, he said we could have instant transmission, faster than light,
he said it could be done. But not that way, he said, never that way. I
didn’t know what he was talking about.”

“Wait a bit. What or where is Arca?”

“Oh, it’s long gone. Settlement or something, Medean natives,
intelligent species, long gone too, far as I know. Or maybe went
underground. That’s Medea for you, full of ecological pockets,
mutatitive radiation, fast evolution; species come, species go. They say
there is a whole race of intelligent balloons over on Castorview. An old
theory, but now it’s ‘sposed to be proved. They—”

“Please—about Dom Felix.”

“Yeh. Yeh. After he came back the natives abandoned Arca. Must’ve, no
bodies around. They must’ve pulled the plug on their wing-house plant,
so Arca just naturally blew away. The wing-houses were—”

“Did Dom Felix—”

“I’m coming to that,” said the old man testily. “The Big Chief was ready
to give Dom Felix anything he wanted including his own job. Dom Felix,
he brought the Acceptance idea and before you know it, an enclave ready
to massacre itself turned into one big happy family. You see, Dom
Felix—”

“I know about that part, Altair. Tell me about the Receiver.”

“Receiver, yeh. There was this technician genius, Kert Row was his name,
and Wallich, a Mule, a theoretical synthesist, best I ever saw. She was
also, well, I had a real big thing for her for a while, well, she had a
lot to do with me Double Tripping a whole lot later, after what
happened.”

Patiently, “What happened?”

“Dom Felix got a little winghouse out in the compound and drafted Kert
Row and Wallich to help him invent the Receiver. Mind you, he had no
head for what it would take, but he had the drive for it and the sure
certain knowledge it can be done, and between them Kert Row and Wallich
had what knowledge and technique he didn’t. How hard he drove them, and
himself too, you wouldn’t believe. And Wallich pregnant at the time,
too. He had some crazy idea it could be done some other way, some way
that would tear Terra apart; he was afraid of that. More than afraid.
Terrified. Anyway, bioenergetics was the key to it, and Wallich was one
of the all-time greats at that. It was Wallich developed the defrosting
technique with orgasm, the full organic bioenergetic field being better
than anything ever invented to kick a Tripper out of stasis. That’s how
she came to be pregnant by Dom Felix. It couldn’t have happened by
anyone on Medea because she was a Mule, if you know what that is.”

“I know what that is. Dom Felix—”

“Dom Felix was from Terra and she had his charts down to the last
molecule. He was a good genetic match and she knew a lot of tricks to
make it perfect. She treated his sperm-sample to make absolutely sure.”

“Why did she do that?”

“Ah, Wally, she had a kink, a little neurotic kink, know what I mean? A
Mule, you know; I remember she said to me once, ‘Altair, oh God, what I
wouldn’t give to be a real woman.’ I said, ‘Well, you are, altogether
through and through,’ and she cried and said she wasn’t. Well, she was;
Trudi, she had hair like—”

“Yes, yes. Still makes you cry, doesn’t it? Ha ha! So she thought if she
had a baby she would be more real than real. Now go on about the
Receiver.”

“Okay, okay. The three of them threw out the electromagnetic spectrum,
and the Einsteinian field complex, space, time, gravity, matter, and
started outside all that, with bioenergetics as the beachhead. Well, it
turned out not to be bioenergetics in the end, but an analog of it,
something brand-new. The vibratory—”

“Yes, I know how it works, everybody knows how it works. I want to know
how it was invented. So—it was the three of them who pulled it off?”

“Well no, not exactly; it was Dom Felix. Kert Row got killed. He was
coming out to Dom Felix’s winghouse with something Dom Felix had sent
him for when an underpillar from the house fell on him. Squashed his
head. There was a mechanic for the cycle pool started an ugly rumor
about that, said the sensor-chips inside the house had been tampered
with, made the house lift and topple the pillar. Said he saw Dom Felix
out there beating on Kert Row’s head. Don’t you believe it. I was out
there myself not ten minutes after and saw Dom Felix working like a
demon to get the pillar off him, not that it would have done any good,
his head was split wide open. Dom Felix was crying, saying over and
over, ‘A way of thinking, that’s all it is, that special way of
thinking.’ I knew he was going to miss that special way of thinking and
I bet he did, but he got through anyway. Maybe it could only have been
done by a crazy man and I told you, he really was kind of crazy.

“Like about the baby. Once Wally was about to term he got the idea to
deliver it himself. He was still the Big Chief’s superhero, mind, so he
could get what he wanted. Wally, I think she loved him—then, not later,
oh God no—but she was willing to do anything he wanted. So he did, all
by himself, and it was okay. And then he called the medics and they took
her and the baby inside. And from that day on he never looked at either
one of them and she wouldn’t even mention his name or let anyone else.
All she told me was he did something so disgusting that it made her sick
to think about it, and it should be forgotten before the kid grew up.
And anyway the kid died and after that she did too, and that’s all I
know.”

“That’s all you know about the Receiver?”

“That’s all I know about Wally. The Receiver, well, you’d think without
Kert Row and Wallich, Dom Felix would’ve ground to a halt. Far from it.
Nothing could’ve stopped a drive like he had; and then, though he had no
real training, maybe something of Kert Row’s design genius and Wally’s
talent for synthesizing theories had rubbed off on him some way. Anyway,
he did it by himself alright, and now you’re talking to me, and all the
settlements on all the planets are tied together again.… Funny thing, he
started out by failing. Maybe that’s what lit his spark.”

“Failing? At what?”

“If you remember, I told you about Arca, the Medean town or shrine or
whatever it was. Dom Felix went out there to bring them Acceptance and
begin a new era on Medea, love and brotherhood between two different
species for the very first time. And that one time he sure laid a big
egg. One visit from him and they cut out and we never saw them again.”

“I never knew Acceptance to fail.”

The old man laughed. “Maybe they just wouldn’t accept him. I told you he
was more than a little crazy.”

“One more thing, Altair. Will you give me your impression of the
Receiver, how you feel about it and what it has done?”

“I think it’s wonderful and marvelous and a miracle and all the other
stuff they say about it, and it certainly has tightened up
communications, and anything that does that for humanity is something
humanity needs, across space or across a room or across a bed. We are
very good at talk and very bad at real communication. Everything we have
ever accomplished we have done at the price of something important; it’s
as if we weren’t capable of seeing all the factors of any problem.
Someone brought rabbits to Australia for pets and the rabbits damn near
ate up the continent. Someone found out petroleum could make a fuel and
they used it for fuel until, one way or another, it killed more people
than any war ever has. Someone found a hormone that would prevent
miscarriages and produced a whole generation of women—their
daughters—with a new kind of cancer. Someone found out how to keep
premature babies alive and produce a couple hundred thousand blind
people. We were always like that. I guess we always will be like that.”

“How do you apply that to the Receiver? Or do you?”

“Sure I do, but it’s a feeling, that’s all; not enough time has gone by
to be sure. But you can see the signs. It’s changed from a great
discovery, a miracle, into a toy, the same way all inventions do when
they turn into entertainments. I just have this feeling about it.… Don’t
know what makes me think about it right now, but when Dom Felix came
back from Arca that time, he asked me, ‘Why don’t dolphins bite?’ Well,
that was a line I used to spout back in those days; dolphins are
carnivores with plenty of sharp teeth, plenty of strength and speed,
they can even take on a shark and drive it off; and men have captured
them and humiliated them and tortured them and brainwashed them and
never once has a dolphin attacked or bitten a man; they even have been
known to help a man to shore. And I used to say, it’s because they know
something we don’t, and they’re sorry for us.”

“I still don’t understand how that applies to the Receiver.”

“Neither do I, friend, not altogether. I told you, it’s just a feeling I
have—that by using little parts of whole things, we pass miracles that
are a lot smaller than they could have been in their own time, in their
own way. I see the Receiver turning into a toy, and it makes me sad.

“It takes a minimum of redesign to turn a crucifix into a pogo stick.”



VENGEANCE IS.


“You have a dark beer?”

“In a place like this you want a dark beer?”

“Whatever, then.”

The bartender drew a thick-walled Stein and slid it across. “I worked in
the city. I know about dark beer and Guinness and like that. These
yokels around here,” he added, his tone of voice finishing the sentence.

The customer was a small man with glasses and not much of a beard. He
had a gentle voice. “A man called Grinny …”

“Grimme,” the barman corrected. “So you’ve heard. Him and his brother.”

The customer didn’t say anything. The bartender wiped. The customer told
him to pour one for himself.

“I don’t usual.” But the barman poured. “Grimme and that brother Dave,
the worst.” He drank. “I hate it a lot out here, yokels like that is
why.”

“There’s still the city.”

“Not for me. The wife.”

“Oh.” And he waited.

“They lied a lot. Come in here, get drunk, tell about what they done,
mostly women. Bad, what they said they done. Worse when it wasn’t lies.
You want another?”

“Not yet.”

“No lie about the Fannen kid, Marcy. Fourteen, fifteen maybe. Tooken her
out behind the Johnson’s silo, what they done to her. And then they said
they kill her, she said anything. She didn’t. Not about that, not about
anything, ever again, two years. Until the fever last November, she told
her mom. She died. Mom came told me ’fore she moved out.”

The customer waited.

“Hear them tell it, they were into every woman, wife, daughter in the
valley, anytime they wanted.”

The customer blew through his nostrils, once, gently. A man came in for
two six-packs and a hip-sized Southern Comfort and went away in a pickup
truck. “ ‘Monday busy’ I call this,” said the bartender, looking around
the empty room. “And here it’s Wednesday.” Without being asked, he drew
another beer for the customer. “To have somebody to talk to,” he said an
explanation. Then he said nothing at all for a long time.

The customer took some beer. “They just went after local folks, then.”

“Grimme and David? Well yes, they had the run of it, the most of the men
off with the lumbering, nothing grows in these rocks around here. Except
maybe chickens, and who cares for chickens? Old folks, and the women.
Anyway, that Grimme, shoulders _this_ wide. Eyes _that_ close together,
and hairy. The brother, maybe you’d say a good-looking guy for a yokel,
but, well, scary.” He nodded at his choice of words and said it again.
“Scary.”

“Crazy eyes,” said the customer.

“You got it. So the times they wasn’t just lyin’, the women didn’t want
to tell and I got to say it, the men just as soon not know.”

“But they never bothered anyone except their own valley people.”

“Who else is ever around here to bother? Oh, they bragged about this one
and that one they got to on the road, you know, blonde in a convertible,
give them the eye, give them whiskey, give them a good time up the back
roads. All lies and you know it. They got this big old van. Gal
hitchhiker, they say the first woman ever used ’em both up. Braggin’,
lyin’. Shagged a couple city people in a little hatchback, leaned on
them ’til the husband begged ’em to ball the wife. I don’t believe that
at all.”

“You don’t.”

“What man would say that to a couple hairy yokels, no matter what? Man
got to be yellow or downright kinky.”

“What happened?”

“Nothing happened, I told you I don’t believe it! It’s lies, brags and
lies. Said they found ’em driving the quarry road, ’way yonder. Passed
’em and parked the van to let ’em by, look ’em over. Passed ’em and got
ahead, when they caught up David was lying on the road and Grimme made
like artificial you know, lifeguards do it.”

“Respiration.”

“Yeah, that. They seen that and they stopped, the couple in the
hatchback, got out, Grimme and David jumped ’em. Said the man’s a
shrimpy little guy look like a professor, woman’s a dish, too good for
him. But that’s what they said. I don’t believe any of it.”

“You mean they’d never do a thing like that.”

“Oh they would all right. Cutting off the woman’s clo’es to see what she
got with a big old skinning knife. Took a while, said it was a lot of
laughs. David holdin’ both her arms behind her back one-handed, cuttin’
away her clo’es and makin’ jokes, Grimme holdin’ the little perfessor
man around the neck with one elbow, laughin’, ’til the man snatched his
head clear and that’s when he said it. ‘Give it to him,’ he told the
woman, ‘Go on, give it to him,’ and she says, ‘For the love of God,
don’t ask me to do that.’ I don’t believe any man would say a thing like
that.”

“You really don’t.”

“No way. Because listen, when the man jerked out his head and said that,
and the woman said don’t ask her to do that, _then_ the perfessor guy
tried to fight Grimme. You see what I’m saying? If Grimme breaks him up
and stomps on the pieces, then you could maybe understand him beggin’
the woman to quit and give in. The way Grimme told it right here
standing where you are, the man said it when Grimme hadn’t done nothing
yet but hold his neck. That’s the part Grimme told over and over,
laughin’. ‘Give it to him,’ the man kept telling her. And Grimme never
even hit him yet. ’Course when the little man tried to fight him Grimme
just laughed and clobbered him once side of the neck, laid him cold.
That was when the woman turned into a wildcat, to hear them tell it. It
was all David could do to hold her, let alone mess around. Grimme left
him to it and went around back to see what they got in their car. Mind
you, I don’t know if he really done all this; I’m just telling you what
he said. I heard it three, four times just that first week.”

“So he open up the back and there was a stack of pictures, you know
painting like on canvas. He hauled ’em all out and put them all down
flat on the ground and walked up and back looking at them. He says,
‘David, you like these?’ and David he said, ‘Hell no,’ and Grimme walked
the whole line, one big boot in the middle of each and every picture.
And he says at the first step that woman screamed like it was her face
he was stepping on and she hollered, ‘Don’t, don’t, they mean everything
in the world to him!’ she meant the perfessor, but Grimme went ahead
anyway. And then she just quit, she said go ahead, and Dave tooken her
into the van and Grimme sat on the perfessor till he was done, then
Grimme went in and got his while Dave sat on the man, after that they
got into their van and come here to get drunk and tell about it. And if
you really want to know why I don’t believe any of it, those people
never tried to call the law.” And the barman gave a vehement nod and
drank deep.

“So what happened to them?”

“Who—the city people? I told you—I don’t even believe there was any.”

“Grimme.”

“Oh. Them.” The barman gave a strange chuckle and said with sudden
piety, “The Lord has strange ways of fighting evil.”

The customer waited. The barman drew them another beer and poured a
jigger for himself.

“Next time I see Grimme it’s a week, ten days after. It’s like tonight,
nobody here. He comes in for a fifth of sourmash. He’s walking funny,
kind of bowlegged. I thought at first trying to clown, he’d do that. But
every step he kind of grunted, like you would if I stuck a knife in you,
but every step. And the look on his face I never saw the like before. I
tell you, it scared me. I went for the whiskey and outside there was
screaming.”

As he talked his gaze went to the floor and wall and somehow through it,
his eyes were round and bulging. “I said ‘What in God’s name is that?’
and Grimme said, ‘It’s David, he’s out in the van, he’s hurtin’. And I
said ‘Better get him to the doctor,’ and he said they just came from
there, full of painkiller but it wasn’t enough, and he took in his
whiskey and left, walking that way and grunting every step, and drove
off. Last time I saw him.”

His eyes withdrew from elsewhere, back into the room, and became more
normal. “He never paid for the whiskey. I don’t think he meant to stiff
me, the one thing he never did. He just didn’t think of it at the time.
Couldn’t,” he added.

“What was wrong with him?”

“I don’t know. The doc didn’t know.”

“That would be Dr. McCabe?”

“McCabe? I don’t know any Dr. McCabe around here. It was Doctor Thetford
over the Allersville Corners.”

“Ah. And how are they now, Grimme and David?”

“Dead is how they are.”

“Dead?… You didn’t say that.”

“I didn’t?”

“Not until now.” The customer got off his stool and put money on the bar
and picked up his car keys. He said, his voice quite as gentle as it had
been all along, “Man wasn’t yellow and he wasn’t kinky. It was something
far worse.” Not caring at all what this might mean to the bartender, he
walked out and got into his car.

He drove until he found a telephone booth—the vanishing kind with a door
that would shut. First he called Information and got a number; then he
dialed it.

“Dr. Thetford? Hello … I want to ease your mind about something. You
recently had two fatalities, brothers.… No, I will not tell you my name.
Bear with me, please. You attended these two and you probably performed
the autopsy, right? Good. I hoped you had. And you couldn’t diagnose,
correct? You probably certified peritonitis, with good reason.… No, I
will _not_ tell you my name! And I am not calling to question your
competence. Far from it. My purpose is only to ease your mind, which
presupposes that you are good at your job and you really care about a
medical anomaly. Do we understand each other? Not yet? Then hear me
out.… Good.”

Rather less urgently, he went on: “An analogy is a disease called
granuloma inguinale, which, I don’t have to tell you, can destroy the
whole sexual apparatus with ulcerations and necrosis, and penetrate the
body to and all through the peritoneum.… Yes, I know you considered that
and I know you rejected it, and I know why.… Right. Just too damn fast.
I’m sure you looked for characteristic bacterial and viral evidence as
well, and didn’t find any.

“… Yes, of course, Doctor—you’re right and I’m sorry, going on about all
the things it isn’t without saying what it is.

“Actually, it’s a hormone poison, resulting from a biochemical mutation
in—in the carrier. It’s synergistic, wildly accelerating—as you saw. One
effect is something you couldn’t possibly know—it affects the tactile
neurons in such a way that morphine and its derivatives have an inverted
effect—in much the same way that amphetamines have a calmative effect on
children. In other words, the morphine aggravated and intensified their
pain.… I know, I know; I’m sorry. I made a real effort to get to you and
tell you this in time to spare them some of that agony, but—as you say
it’s just too damn fast.

“… Vectors? Ah. That’s something you do not have to worry about. I mean
it, doctor—it is totally unlikely you will ever see another case.

“… Where did it come from? I can tell you that. The two brothers
assaulted and raped a woman—very probably the only woman on earth to
have this mutated hormone poison.… Yes, I _can_ be sure. I have spent
most of the last six years researching this thing. There have been only
two other cases of it—yes, just as fast, just as lethal. Both occurred
before she was aware of it. She—she is a woman of great sensitivity and
a profound sense of responsibility. One was a man she cared very little
about, hardly knew. The other was someone she cared very much indeed
about. The cost to her when she discovered what had happened was—well,
you can imagine.

“She is a gentle and compassionate person with a profound sense of
ethical responsibility. Please believe me when I tell you that at the
time of the assault she would have done anything in their power to
protect those—those men from the effects of that … contact. When her
husband—yes, she has a husband, I’ll come to that—when he became
infuriated at the indignities they were putting on her, and begged her
to give in and let them get what they deserved, she was
horrified—actually hated him for a while for having given in to such a
murderous suggestion. It was only when they vandalized some things that
were especially precious to her husband—priceless—that she too
experienced the same deadly fury and let them go ahead. The reaction has
been terrible for her—first to see her husband seeking vengeance, when
she was convinced he could rise above that—and in a moment find that she
herself could be swept away by that same thing.… But I’m sorry, Dr.
Thetford—I’ve come far afield from medical concerns. I meant only to
reassure you that you are not looking at some mysterious new plague. You
can be sure that every possible precaution is being taken against its
recurrence.… I admit that total precautions against the likes of those
two may not be possible, but there is little chance of it happening
again. And that sir, is all I’m going to say, so good—

“What? Unfair?… I suppose you’re right at that—to tell you so much and
so little all at once. And I do owe it to you to explain what my concern
is in all this. Please—give me a moment to get my thoughts together.

“… Very well. I was commissioned by that lady to make some discreet
inquiries about what happened to those two, and if possible to get to
their doctor in time to inform him—you—about the inverted effect of
morphine. There would be no way to save their lives, but they might have
been spared the agony. Further, she found that not knowing for sure if
they were indeed victims was unbearable. This news is going to be hard
for her to take, but she will survive that somehow; she’s done it
before. Hardest of all for her—and her husband—will be to come to terms
with the fact that, under pressure, they both found themselves capable
of murderous vengefulness. She always believed, and by her example he
came to believe, that vengeance is unthinkable. And he failed her. And
she failed herself.” Without a trace of humor, he laughed. “ ‘Vengeance
is mine, sayeth the Lord.’ I can’t interpret that, doctor, or vouch for
it. All I can derive from this—episode—is that vengeance _is_. And
that’s all I intend to say to you—what?

“… One more question … Ah—the husband. Yes, you have the right to ask
about that. I’ll say it this way: There was a wedding seven years ago.
It was three years before there was a marriage, you follow? Three years
of the most intensive research and the most meticulous experimentation.
And you can accept as fact that she is the only woman in the world who
can cause this affliction—and he is the only man who is immune.

“Dr. Thetford, goodnight.”

He hung up and stood for a long while with his forehead against the cool
glass of the booth. At length, he shuddered, pulled himself together,
went out and drove away in his little hatchback.



SEASONING


Don’t churn a bunch of seasonings and flavorings into your hamburgers.
Just knead the meat well and form them on the cutting board. As they
firm up you can get the knack of throwing them down flat with a
gratifying _slap_. Make them just a little wider than your onion rolls.
Now they won’t fall apart when you turn them under the broiler. The
results are astonishing. But that’s not the best part.

I don’t belong here.

“Free will and predestination are the same thing,” said Alice. She was
tall and had long brown hair and a high-domed forehead and blazing blue
eyes, fire and ice. “By the time you leave here you’ll understand that.”
She was a seminar leader. I never thought I’d go to one of those things
but I did.

On each raw hamburger put four dots of Tabasco, a puddle of ketchup the
size of a quarter, another one like it of steak sauce or barbecue sauce,
and very lightly dust them with powdered garlic. Now stack them, one on
top of the other, rotating each one enough to spread the seasonings.
Take the top one and put it on the bottom. This will leave a mess on
your cutting board. That’s okay. Turn the broiler on. And I still
haven’t gotten to the best part.

Alice put us through a whole series of processes and exercises. I won’t
describe them because you might want to go someday and a lot of them are
effective only because you don’t know until later what they’re for. “I
can’t give you insights,” Alice said, “You’ll have to do that by
yourself.” But I will tell you about one of them. She gave us a set of
cards with questions written on each, and one of mine said “Write what
is true about yourself.” And I wrote: “I don’t belong here.”

Set out your hamburgers on a broiling grille—the kind with ridges.
That’s important. Slice some onions (the red ones are best; the flat
ones are mildest) and some tomatoes, very thin. A sharp serrated knife
is best. Get two soup bowls exactly the same size and put the onions and
tomatoes into one of them. Cover the surface with Worcestershire sauce
and again with soy sauce. Slide the pan with the hamburgers under the
broiler. The best part is coming up.

Four days after the seminar I went to see Alice. She did personal
counseling as well as seminars, so I knew her address. I could’ve phoned
first but I didn’t. I knocked and she called “Who is it?” And I said
“Me—from the seminar.” She opened the door. She was wearing a blue robe
with a red sash. She said, “Come in.” I looked at her for a long
time—seconds, I suppose, but much longer I think that I’ve ever looked
at anyone without saying anything. She looked into my eyes without
blinking and without shifting her gaze. Finally I said, “I’d like to
make love to you.” She said, “Now?”

Split your onion rolls. English muffins are all right, but too small.
Onion rolls are best. Now is the time to slice your cheese. Your choice:
I like extra sharp Cheddar. Now take the empty soup bowl and set it
upside down, lip-to-lip, over the one with the tomatoes and onions in
it, and turn them over. (Better do this over the sink.) Now all the soy
and Worcestershire sauces which have drained through will drain right
back again. Pull out the broiling pan and turn the hamburgers. You’re
very near to learning the best part.

She pulled on the red sash and it fell away. She shrugged out of the
robe and took my hand. She was very beautiful, lean and firm. She had a
large warm waterbed. She was wonderful. Afterward I wanted to know if it
was always that quick and easy with her, with, well, anybody, but I
didn’t dare. She sat in the middle of the bed in a lotus position and
smiled, and answered anyway. “You have something much more important
than sex on your mind, but it was in the way. Now we can get to it. It’s
what you wrote on that last card, isn’t it?”

If you have an oven over the broiler, put the onion rolls in for not
more than two minutes. Take them out and spread each half with
mayonnaise, very thin—so thin that people who don’t like mayonnaise
won’t know it’s there. Now turn the broiler off, pull out the pan, lay
on the cheese and slide the pan back in. The broiler will be quite hot
enough to melt the cheese. Put a lettuce leaf on each half roll and then
the onions and tomatoes. Peek into the broiler and if the cheese is
melted, lift out the hamburgers with a spatula and assemble them onto
the rolls. Aside from eating them, the best part is next.

“I wrote, ‘I don’t belong here,’ ” I said.

“I know,” she said. She really did; she remembered, and she sees scores
of people, hundreds of cards. I said, “It … sort of went off like a
flashbulb in the face.” She didn’t say anything, just watched me with
that steady bright gaze. I said, “I didn’t mean I didn’t belong in the
seminar, or in the city, I mean _here_, here in this world, in this
life.” She was great at just waiting, just saying nothing. So I had to
say more. “It hit me so hard that I knew it was true. Know that it is
true. But …” She still waited; she wasn’t going to help, not at this
point. “But if I don’t belong here, never have, never since I was
born—where do I belong?”

Now comes the best part. After you’ve eaten, the broiling pan is still
warm. Get a Pyrex dish—a large custard cup is just right—and a wire
tea-strainer, and you pour off the fat that has sweated out of the
hamburgers. You do the same thing when you broil _anything_ except fish:
pork, beef, lamb, venison—anything; also when you fry something in
butter. That fat carries with it the flavor of all those meats and all
those seasonings. Every once in awhile you warm the custard cup—the
place on the top of the stove where the pilot light hides, if you have
that kind of stove, is just right. All those different fats will blend,
and down at the bottom (this is why you use glass), you’ll find a dark
brown layer. This is water-based—all the fat has floated away from it.
Put the cup in the fridge for an hour or so, and you have absolutely
magic frying fat. Put a lot in a pan and when it melts, spoon it over
eggs until they’re “blinded”—a thin film over the yolks while the whites
are firm. As for the dark layer—pop the whole lump out of the cup and
you can scrape that dark stuff off with a table knife and drop it into
gravy, soup, or stew. That cup of fat is the best part.

Alice said, “Aside from that—what do you remember most about the
seminar?”

I looked down at my hands, turned them over. They seemed very real. “The
little man.” She waited. “The little man inside, that no matter how mad
you get, how you scream or fight or—or—” I made a gesture at her,
sitting in the middle of the bed “—or how high you fly with someone,
that little man is back there watching you. I never met anyone yet who
hasn’t had that feeling from time to time.”

Alice said, “And who is that little man?” I remembered. “You said that
it wasn’t a little man at all. You said it was a—a thing—an entity. An
intelligent entity … checking up on his script.”

“_Your_ script,” she said.

“Okay, okay, my script.” I had to stop for a while then, to think back,
replay. It was hard, but I felt very close to something.

The richest, tastiest chowder you ever flang a fang into, fast and easy:
get a can of condensed New England chowder, and instead of milk, rinse
out the can with two-thirds heavy cream or half-and-half, and one third
sherry. Add a tin of smoked baby clams. Heat gently, and serve with a
very light sprinkle of cayenne. Don’t expect anyone to eat a heavy
entrée after this.

“You said to imagine a great big sphere, and inside is all of time and
space. All of it. And outside are these intelligent entities, and all
they are is curious; all they want to do is experience.”

“Go on,” Alice said. Her eyes are so bright.…

“One might say: ‘I want the experience of being a seventeen-year-old
girl in the fourteenth century who was burned at the stake.’ Or ‘I’d
like the experience of being a four-month aborted fetus in 1994.’ And
they just dive in and do it.” I looked at Alice. She was waiting for
something. I thought about what I just said, and then I remembered:
“They have to create what happens. Write a script.” She still waited, so
I said, “Not only the experience itself; the house, the city, the
country, the whole world where it happens. All of it.”

“Which makes that entity responsible for all of it,” she reminded me.

“So that’s who the ‘little man watching’ really is—that, that _thing—_”

“Not a thing,” she said, interrupting for the very first time. “It’s
_you_. You’re living a script that you wrote. Which is why free will and
predestination are the same thing.”

It’s nice when food looks beautiful and it isn’t hard to do. Make nests
of rice or mashed potatoes—some East Indian restaurants serve the rice
out of ring molds, so you can put the curry in the center and the
condiments all around the edges. When you mash potatoes, steal the
packet of cheese sauce out of that cheap macaroni-and-cheese dinner and
throw it in, with some butter and maybe a flat tablespoon of mayonnaise,
not enough to identify. It comes out a beautiful pale orange. Make a
nest and put in your stew or goulash or whatever, inside the nest. If
you really want to make a guest gasp and drool, trim a piece of heavy
cardboard exactly to the diameter of your dinner plates so that it makes
a fence. Make a spaghetti sauce with clams instead of meat and a white
clam sauce from an undiluted can of chowder with some minced clams
added, plus their juice. Put linguine—that’s flat spaghetti—on one side
of the fence and spinach noodles on the other side, and white sauce on
the green pasta and red sauce on the white pasta and remove the fence.

“But why write such rotten scripts? If what you say is so, everybody’s
where they want to be, even beggars with sores on their shins and
starving children and guys being tortured in jails?” She nodded,
watching me. I said, “I can’t accept that.”

She waited a bit and then almost smiled. “Unacceptable?” She asked
softly.

And that rang a bell. “Unacceptable … ‘to accept the unacceptable.’ You
said that, in the seminar. But I can’t remember why you said it.”

“Yes you can,” she said, and waited. I drew a total blank this time, and
I guess she knew it, because she gave me a nudge: “You say you don’t
belong here. Is ‘here’—unacceptable?”

“Yes,” I said without hesitation. “Then,” she asked, “why did you write
this script?” “You mean—the me out there?” She nodded. I thought about
that, and then mumbled, “I put it down to—curiosity? That’s all. I mean,
throwing yourself into imperfect places, into pain and disappointment
and well, the unacceptable—it just doesn’t make sense.”

“It doesn’t?”

“It sure doesn’t … unless …” I felt my eyes get big. “Unless those, uh,
entities want to do what you said—to learn to accept the unacceptable.
Even if they have to create it. That doesn’t make sense.”

“It doesn’t? Suppose they can’t go on unless they learn that.”

“Go on? Go on where?” She shrugs. “Everything living has to go on. Seed
to shrub, shrub to tree, egg to bird.”

“You mean—evolve. They have to learn to accept the unacceptable in order
to evolve into—whatever’s next for them.” Surprisingly, she laughed. She
said, “You keep on saying ‘they.’ ”

Something in my stomach made me notice the clock on the headboard. “My
God … have you eaten yet?”

“It’s all right,” she said.

“It isn’t all right. Hey, let me cook something.”

“I don’t know if there is anyth—”

I hopped off the waterbed, making waves. “I’ll find something. Where is
the kitchen?” She pointed. Naked, I went into the kitchen.

She was right. A dozen eggs, some butter. Whole grain bread. In the
freezer, broccoli, green beans—ah. Onion rings. I turned on the oven—all
the way.

Alice came out to watch.

I set out four cups and a big bowl. On the third try I found the drawer
with the eggbeater in it. I carefully separated the eggs, putting the
whites in the bowl and one yolk each in the four cups. For this one you
don’t want the yolks to break. I put a pinch of salt in the bowl. Alice
leaned back against the refrigerator. “Why is ‘here’ unacceptable?”
Lord, she’s beautiful.

I punched down the control on the electric toaster, and turn the knob
over to ‘light.’ These things always work better if you cycle them once.
I took up the eggbeater and began to crank like hell. When I began to
feel it in my shoulder I stopped and asked her if she had any hot
chocolate, cocoa. She waved a hand at a cabinet. I’d seen the bunch of
dried jalapeno peppers by then, you see. I found two big mugs and used
one of them to measure out two cupfuls of milk into a saucepan and put
it on low. The chocolate was instant. Well, you use what you have. I
dumped a packet into each mug. “Why is ‘here’ unacceptable?” She asked
again.

I lifted the eggbeater to see if the beaten whites came to sharp points
yet. They didn’t. She came close and touched my arm. You can build up
static electricity with shoes on a dry carpet; can you do it barefoot on
asphalt tile? She said, “You don’t answer. Is it because you don’t know,
or because you do know?”

“Oh, I know. I just don’t have the words for it yet.” I started to crank
and she went back to the refrigerator. I stopped to put the first two
slices of bread in the toaster and turned down the heat under the milk.
You don’t want to boil milk. I beat the egg whites some more until they
peaked sharp and firm like stalagmites. I said, “There’s something so
wrong about this whole world, about, well, life.… You really want to
hear this?”

“Yes.”

The toaster popped. I took out the toast, barely golden, put in the rest
of the bread, buttered the hot slices. “Where’d you get all this, about
scripts and everything?”

“I read a book,” she said. “_2150 A.D._, by Alexander. I began to teach
it. The more I taught it, the more I learned. That’s what teaching is
all about.”

The rest of the toast popped up. Laying on butter, I said, “I saw a
film. Underwater. Eight or nine crabs fighting over a dead fish. All
kicking and clawing and biting each other, stealing and shoving … it’s
all like that.”

“What’s all like that?”

I said impatiently, “Everything. Everything in the world. Life.” I found
a cookie sheet and put out the four pieces of toast. I began spooning
the stiff egg whites onto them. There was a lot of egg white; it mounded
up high. With a spoon I made a crater in the middle of each one. I slit
open the end of the box of frozen onion rings with my thumbnail and took
out four of them, and placed one of them into each crater. “There’s
something terribly wrong about that,” I said. “All the life there is
feeds on the dead bodies of other life. I can’t believe any kind of life
wants it that way; all life wants to do is to live.” I opened the oven
and checked it: hot. I shut the door and took out one of the cups with
the yolk in it, and carefully dropped the yolk into the center of the
onion ring. “And you know what comes out of that?” I went on. “From the
tiniest plankton right on up the food chain, it’s fighting and killing,
to feed and stay alive to fight and kill some more.” I finished dropping
in the yolks and put the cookie sheet into the oven. I spun around and
looked her right in the eyes. “And that’s just plain wrong.”

She didn’t blink. But her lips twitched a little and she said softly,
“Unacceptable?”

“You’re damn right, unacceptable!” I got to the milk about four seconds
before bubbles started to lace the sides of the saucepan, and poured it
into the mugs. I took down a dried jalapeno and cut it into two
lengthwise and used the pieces, one in each hand, to stir the hot
chocolate. “You know whose recipe this is, for the chocolate? Elizabeth
the First, back in the 16th century … Unacceptable, yes. ‘Way out in the
back country when I was a kid I saw them butcher a pig. They hung it up
by the hind legs and cut its throat; it bled and screamed for twenty
minutes. It’s easy to call that unacceptable; you can see it and hear
it. Things are better now,” I said bitterly, “because it’s done where we
don’t see or hear it anymore. One of those hunters who clubbed baby harp
seals said something really important to a reporter; he said, ‘If these
things looked like lobsters you guys wouldn’t be here.’ ”

“My goodness,” said Alice. I could tell she didn’t say that about pigs
or lobsters; she said it about how excited I was. I peeked into the
oven. Not yet. I went on: “And it isn’t only animal life. Who’s to say a
carrot doesn’t scream in some different wavelength when it’s pulled up?
Here’s a happy cow, murdering grass blades by the thousands, and
shuffling its big hard feet through the bleeding bodies before they’re
dead; talk about Auschwitz!” More quietly I said, “All life wants to do
is live, but under it all is the pressure to do it by killing. Is it any
wonder we’re at the very edge of blowing up the earth? On the surface we
can cry a lot and chant ‘Give peace a chance,’ but deep down underneath
is a joy in killing because there’s no other way to live here.” I turned
off the oven. Alice took down two plates and put them on the work
surface next to the stove. With a spatula I took the things out of the
oven and dished them up.

“They’re called butterfly eggs,” I said. “I don’t know why.” Alice
gasped. They were beautiful—quite large but light as cloud, with the
little horns of the egg white not quite brown and shading through gold
to snow. The yolks were still liquid, held in the seasoned circle of
onion. She took the plates to the table in the nook at the end of the
kitchen and I brought the mugs. We sat down and Alice tasted the cocoa.
“Oh my goodness,” she said again, and it was as fine a compliment as I
have ever heard. Then she set down the mug and began to laugh, chimes
and cadenzas of rich wonderful laughter, until she ran out of breath,
while I sat there dumbfounded. While she blotted her eyes with a paper
napkin I said, a little stiffly, “What was that about?”

“Later,” she said, and went to work on the butterfly egg. “Oh …” she
said, and again it was a profound, an elaborate, even an awed
communication. So we sat quietly and ate in appreciative silence. It was
good, I’ll say that. Perfect.

I looked up from my empty plate and fell into that steady blue gaze.
“You’re quite right,” she said soberly. “You don’t belong here.” She
gave me time to let that soak in and then said, “Neither do I. Neither
does anyone.” She took up the empty dishes and mugs, and carried them to
the sink. I love to watch her, her hands, the way she moves. She came
back and sat opposite. I enjoyed the epaulettes of light on her smooth
shoulders, from the window behind her. She said, “It isn’t curiosity, or
thirst for experience, or some sort of endurance test that makes us
write the scripts we do. What we do is to ponder the possibility of a
fulfillment, an ethos—a _good_, if you like—so high and so strong that
nothing can destroy it, or even tarnish it. If we think we have it, we
create a situation, a world—a universe if we have to—in which all reason
says that high ideal just cannot exist; we write that script, and we
experience it; and if we find that the good still shines through, we
know we’ve found it.”

“I thought creating universes was God’s job,” I said, jokingly.

“It is,” she said, not joking at all. She let that sink in for a while
and then said, “This isn’t the only philosophy that winds up saying
‘thou art God.’ ”

“Even me?” I said, in such a genuine astonishment that I made her laugh.

“Seems to me,” I said, “if we’re all writing our very own scripts, there
may not be enough room for them all in the universe.”

“There is,” she smiled, “in infinity.” I think that was the moment when
I understood that Alice really believes, really lives in the place she
teaches about. “Go where you don’t belong. Accept what you find. Want
what you have, not what you don’t have.”

“What happens after you’ve played out your script?”

“You go back and write another one, with something else that’s
unacceptable.”

“And ultimately you get to where there is nothing in all infinity that
you can’t accept?”

“I don’t know that. I haven’t been there yet,” said Alice. Then she
said, “You really love to cook.”

“Yes …”

“Eggs and toast, that would be enough to feed on. The hose in the gas
tank. Fuel. What makes you do butterfly eggs?”

“I dunno. I just like to.”

“You just like to. You create a hell of a world, where the absolute
necessity for existence is a chain of murder. You do it because it’s the
most unacceptable thing you can possibly think of. But to do that you
have to create a planet in a universe in which such a thing can happen.
You have to take the responsibility then, disease and war and cruelty
and injustice. But don’t beat yourself up with that. To make everything
fit you had to create Bach and sunsets and ecstasy and love and
butterfly eggs too. Acceptance is more than to sit smiling under a bodhi
tree while everything goes to hell. It’s taking the thing you can’t
tolerate and making something beautiful out of it—and then sharing it.”
She reached across and took my hand. “That’s why I laughed so hard when
I looked at the butterfly eggs. Here you were so frowning and puzzled
and feeling lost while you took the unacceptable and made beauty out of
it, and shared it.”

Then we went back to the waterbed, and it was good, it was better than
anything or anybody before. But it wasn’t the best part.

The best part is that I will never, never be afraid of dying.

That, now—that’s better than seasoned grease.



NOT AN AFFAIR


She cried out: _“I thought I loved him!”_ She had cried and cried ever
since she told him, ever since she had _had_ to tell him about what had
happened; she had cried through all of his anguished demands as to
exactly what had happened, cried while she answered him truthfully,
instant by instant of that evening and night, the innocent acceptance to
cocktails, the acceptance of the ride home, then, then, then, what
happened in the car.

Most of the night, half a day then, the questions, questions shouted,
questions sobbed; the “Who was it?” questions, and their chain: “You
don’t know? How could you not know?”; the “How could you?” questions,
with their “While I—,” “When I—”; and the “At this of all times” chains:
“While I sweat there in that rotten warehouse until two in the morning
to get us a little extra, to get _you_ a little extra,” and “When I
trusted you, have always trusted you,” and “At this of all times, when
we have to live apart, sleep apart.…”

A love, a wedding, a honeymoon that went on and on for almost a year
now; the exciting new job with a civilian firm in a foreign land,
building a military base; and the lonely weeks when he went first; and
the joy when her application was approved and she, too, could come; and
the appalling news that until the housing area was completed they would
have to live in bachelor quarters, she in her barracks, he in his, under
the stiff-necked regulations of a base commander who went by the book
(no cohabitation except in married quarters, and Marine guards under
strict orders to enforce)—and “at this of all times,” the one time when
the commandant permitted a military/civilian celebration off the base,
the one time when they had both been invited and he insisted she go
while he rolled up some overtime in the warehouse, the one time
she—she—it had happened, and with a stranger. Who was he? She didn’t
really know. Where was he? Gone, flown away that night on whatever
function he had with the company. Or the military. She didn’t even know
that.

So it came down at last to the apparently endless chain of demands—“Why?
Why? Why did you do it?”—and there was no answer, none, none, for a day
and a night and some hours to boot, until last she cried out: “I thought
I loved him!”

The slow door of the ladies room closed itself on the click-buzz-hum of
the big office. Ariadne Guelph passed through the inside door to find
her friend May Stern crouched on the settee, hands between knees,
slump-shouldered, a portrait of misery. “May, honey—whatever is the
matter?”

The younger girl looked up slowly. “Ari. Oh. Ari.”

Ariadne sat beside her, put an arm around her. “I heard old Bristle-chin
telling someone over the phone that he can’t get any work out of you
today, or any sense either. What is it, Maisie? That’s not like you.”

“In there …” May waved a hand toward the inner room and its row of
booths.

“I’ll see.” She rose and looked inside, returned. “There’s no one in
there.… Tell me, dear.”

May took Ariadne’s hands and looked up at her with wistful eyes.
“Ariadne, last night I—well, I …”

“Let me guess. It was some guy.”

Silently she nodded.

“And you made it with him.”

Another nod. A quivering lip.

“Gosh, honey, it happens all the time. Who was it?”

The weeping began. “Th—that’s just it. I don’t _know!_”

“You were raped!”

“I wish I had been,” and she laughed weakly through the tears. “Oh,
that’s crazy, of course not. What I mean … I wanted to, I wanted … him,
I just didn’t care. And I don’t know why. And I don’t know _him_.”

“I think,” said Ariadne firmly, “that this is just one of those things
that can happen. No harm done, and you can forget it.”

Little May more or less did, too, until she missed her next period.

Lynn was very happily married. At first she and Jon talked sometimes
about having a child—dream stuff, “maybe someday” stuff, but it was
never really an issue. And as time went by she became increasingly
convinced that it was just something which would never happen. And the
pills and all that were such a nuisance; she quite forgot them some of
the time, then all of the time.

Then she had her inexplicable adventure—she who was the least
adventurous of women. She and a friend went into a bar—for the friend’s
thirst, not her own; she just didn’t go to bars—and the friend gulped
and left because of an appointment, and Lynn, who never gulped, stayed
to finish her sipping. And then _he_ was there, standing by the little
table, sitting across from her, saying things she could no longer
remember in a soft, deep voice … oh, yes, she remembered one thing: “I
do not want an affair, I want an experience,” and a walk to, to wherever
it was, not far, a warm, clean space for the bed … the walk could not be
recalled because of the thick cloud of wanting in which she drifted. It
happened, and she was outside again walking with him, walking without
him, and finally home, quite alone, totally bewildered, captured between
the truth and disbelief.

By the time Jon got home she had decided not to tell him, and there
really was no need to. Lynn was a very composed lady.

Evelyn was not a very composed lady, and she did tell Kevin when he got
home; she had to, distraught as she was with astonished self-hatred.
Kevin immediately beat the hell out of her. He beat her so badly that
she called the police, and when they arrived he stood over her with a
new insanity shining in his eyes so brightly that she did as he told her
to do; and she said to the police that she had been raped, that Kevin
had come home to find her in his battered condition. The moment she was
alone at the police station she told the sympathetic women of the rape
crisis unit what had really happened. So Kevin was arrested and jailed,
and Evelyn went for frantic hours to everyone she could reach to gather
enough money to bail him out. Shaken and well cooled, he went home with
her and lay all night crying in her soothing arms.

A military base hospital is so very male-oriented that the presence of a
woman with an obstetric difficulty seems somehow inappropriate, but no
one can say why.

After her affair (no, it was not an affair, it was an experience), her
husband would not touch her. When she underwent a pregnancy test, which
he had stonily demanded, and it came out positive, he touched her even
less; he touched her no more with his eyes, his voice.

And when, exactly at the time her next menses were due, she miscarried,
he was flooded with joy, and became his old garrulous, affable self; but
it was over for her, all over. He sat there in the hospital room with
flowers in his hand, showering relieved gladness on a piece of stone,
which would not come to life even when he said he forgave her.

Dr. Gerald Macomb McCambridge, head of the heavily funded and
prestigious Genetic Research Laboratories, dialed a number and spoke:
“Hi, Wacky.” Nostalgic baby-talk: the name was Whickter, which became
“Whiskey,” then “Wicky,” and finally “Wicky-wacky,” which Professor Dr.
Alonzo Frederick Whickter heartily detested; he gave it back: “Oh, hi,
Macmac.”

“I can look down this wire,” said McCambridge without preliminary, “and
see past your left shoulder and through that door into your filing
cabinet a folder describing a prepartum female who, having committed
whatever it takes to become pregnant, has passed one period and
spontaneously aborted on the next.”

“You’ve been peeking,” said Whickter.

“I _am_ peeking,” said McCambridge. “I now read further down the file.
The same ladies subsequently test sterile, due to a very slight
malformation, or alteration, of the outer membrane of the ovum,
rendering it impenetrable.”

“How the hell did you know? I have twenty-two like that.”

“I have forty-five,” said McCambridge, “and I suspect that out there on
my secretary’s desk are a fair clutch more. But I’m not finished reading
over this wire and through that door into your files.” He cleared his
throat. “Not a few of these patients are, or need to be, in psychiatric
hands to pursue the conviction that they do not know who impregnated
them nor how it was accomplished.”

“Mac,” said Whickter with no trace of banter left in his voice, “what
the hell is it—an epidemic?”

McCambridge let silence fill the line.

Whickter drew a shuddering breath. “My God. I think you just said it
was.”

“You said it.”

“How far has it gone?”

McCambridge shrugged, sure that the other man could sense the gesture.
“As a general rule, what percentage of cases of any specific disorder
show up in my labs or your practice? If you suddenly get five cases of
toxic shock syndrome, how many can you estimate are in the general
population?”

“I factor with a big number,” conceded Whickter. “Of course—”

“Of course what?”

“I’d have to know the epicenters. Five cases in a neighborhood, a city,
a seaboard—”

“What do you get from your files?”

“Minneapolis … South Bend … (two in South Bend, I think) … Louisville.
Quite a cluster in Louisville.… It’s gone pretty far. Too far.”

“London,” said McCambridge “Metz, Casablanca, Capetown, Buenos Aires,
Nairobi, and something in Hong Kong that looks very much like it.”

“Oh, my God,” Whickter said again, and this interested McCambridge very
much; he had heard this expression from Alonzo Whickter perhaps twice
since their college days. “You must have had your League of Nations on
the prowl.”

“Right,” said McCambridge. His “League of Nations” was a very special
group of graduate students, each as distinct a specimen of the various
human subspecies as McCambridge had been able to find. Each kept close
contact with his or her racial origins; for his special projects,
McCambridge wanted as little dilution as possible.

“Then,” said Whickter, “you already knew it was an epidemic.”

“Let’s say I was wondering if it could be.”

“Mac, what shall we do? Call in the press, alert people?”

“The press,” said McCambridge, having traveled this course before, “will
not need any calling in. When the media become aware of it, they’ll
come. And right here is where they’ll come to. Calling in the press
before you have a diagnosis, and especially before you can point at a
treatment, is pushing a quite unnecessary panic button. Tell me: have
any of your patients suffered permanently, aside from emotional trauma?”

“Not really. Not so far.”

“All right. Now here is something you, as dean of a school of gynecology
and obstetrics, can do, something I’d rather not stir up from this
source. I need data on unaffected carriers.”

“Like Typhoid Mary.”

“Not like Typhoid Mary. Like men. Go from the hypothesis that if the man
had contact with a woman who has had this—what?—plague, and then has
contact with another woman, what chance has a second woman got to
contact the disease?”

“I think I can get you some data.”

“I think you can. And if you can find out at what stage the male picks
up the bug—that is, if the contact occurs during a pregnancy or after
the miscarriage, spontaneous aborting, whatever you call it—that would
be valuable.”

“I’ll try.”

McCambridge said very quietly. “It’s kind of urgent, Alonzo.”

“I’ll do it.”

“I know you will. Goodnight.”

All night long Dr. McCambridge’s teletype chuckled as it recorded
reports. Bahia. Provincetown. Manila. Addis Ababa. Tel Aviv. Edmonton …

“May, honey! Are you all right? You took a day off.”

“Am I all right? I’m more than all right! I lost it!”

“You lost what?”

“Shh. Gossip I don’t need.… You know, what you came in to talk to me
about. That time. In the ladies’.”

“Oh, my goodness. Don’t tell me you were—”

“I was, but I’m not. Not anymore. And I didn’t have to go to a—to the
doctor, either. It just, well, it’s gone, that’s all.”

“You never told me! I never dreamed—”

“I didn’t want to worry you. And something else: I’ve met the most
marvelous man.… Tell you at lunch.”

Lynn composedly told Jon that she was expecting, and he was overjoyed,
so much so that it was easy for her to conclude that what he didn’t know
could hurt him very much. They had a marvelous, romantic month during
which he handed her into and out of the car, helped her up steps,
carried every package even though it might hold no more than a comb,
until she discovered one rather messy morning that they had nothing to
expect. At this news Jon expressed sadness, but it was a rather modified
sadness. It seemed to have under it a stratum of something else,
something not the least sad. This was revealed when he consoled the
deprived would-be mother with, “After all, we really have a full life
together. In a way, another, ah, person, would dilute it, hm?” He smiled
then, and took a breath which considerably expanded his broad chest.
“I’ve got to say, though, that it did something for me to learn that I
could do it after all. Not that I was really worried or anything. And
the fact that you couldn’t carry it doesn’t change that at all.”

“Oh,” she said composedly.

Dr. McCambridge had hoped to be approached first by one of the large
newsmagazines, with good writing and a sizable and energetic research
staff; or at least a major city newspaper, part of a chain that would
cover the country—foreign press, please copy. These were, however,
scooped by a supermarket tabloid that specialized in gross gossip,
flying saucers, arthritis pain, and the intimate conduct of stars and
high bureaucrats. Dr. McCambridge paused for a moment to consider
whether or not to grant the appointment, and then sighed and, from
somewhere in the depths of his worldly wisdom, recognized that the
impact of these tabloids was upward by way of the underbelly and not
downward to the brain; that is to say, they crossed the breakfast table
and the bar more readily than did more respectable periodicals. It had
to come out sooner or later; it _must_ come out, and perhaps it were
better done through “I read somewhere that—” or “They’re saying that—”
than by accurately quoting a trusted source.

“Let him in.”

The reporter was something of a surprise. About him was none of his
employer’s sleaziness, carelessness, or flash. Young, articulate, and
bright-eyed, he had done a good deal of homework. He knew quite as much
as any layman about the Genetic Research organization and its work, and
he knew the towering stature of the man to whom he was talking. He was
polite and he was relentless. His name was Szigeti, and after the
handshake his opening gun was, “I want the truth about what’s
happening.”

“You’ve got it,” said McCambridge easily. “It’s raining.”

Szigeti’s head cocked, birdlike, and his lips twitched. “Perhaps I’d
better start over.”

McCambridge smiled and nodded.

“I think there’s an epidemic.”

“I think so, too. There’s an influenza strain called Australian Beta
that looks quite ominous. There is herpes simplex II, and I understand
that some countries have abandoned mass inoculations and we’re looking
at yellow fever again.”

“You know what I’m talking about.”

“I do?”

Szigeti made a slight motion which encompassed the entire imposing
complex of the Genetic Research establishment. “None of those have
anything to do with your specialty.”

“What has, then?”

Szigeti leaned forward. “I just keep hearing a story—the same story over
and over, but from all kinds of people in all kinds of places.
Somebody’s wife or girlfriend gets pregnant, and then she loses it—real
soon, second month.”

“It happens.”

“Sure it happens, has happened. But—maybe because I’m a reporter—I get
this itch. I mean, if somebody walks down the street knocking his head
with his fist every time he passes a lamppost, that’s just another nut.
But when six, ten, twenty people start doing it, I get this itch.… Has
anybody come to you with this yet?”

“Nobody in the media, if that’s what you mean.”

“That isn’t what I meant, but I’m pleased to hear it.” He had a good
smile.

“Does your itch suggest anything else?”

“No. Well, maybe yes. Maybe it’s too early to tell. Maybe what these
women, these couples are going through have some spooked; they don’t
want to risk it again. But I haven’t heard yet that any woman who has
lost one this way has been able to get pregnant again.”

“Not _able?_”

“Well, I guess I can’t really say that. But _you_ might. That’s what
made me think of coming here.”

“What does her doctor say?”

“Whose doctor? Jesus,” Szigeti breathed. After a moment, he said, “I’ve
heard about you, Dr. McCambridge. Now I believe everything I’ve heard.
You guessed it. My wife. Mattie. We have one kid. We wanted another; she
lost it. There was nothing wrong with her the first time and there’s
nothing wrong with her now, or me.”

“Your doctor says.”

“Our doctor says. And he says keep trying.” Szigeti’s mouth twitched at
the corner. “We keep trying. Everything. Eight months now since we went
through what’s written in her files, what they call SA: spontaneous
abortion.”

“I’m sorry,” McCambridge said with all his heart.

“Not your fault,” said Szigeti brusquely. He withdrew a very clean
handkerchief and blew his nose and put the handkerchief away. “I guess
when you have one thing uppermost in your head day and night, it colors
everything you do and think about. So I began looking around me, and I
began hearing the same story over and over again.” He wet his lips and
leaned forward with that sharp-eyed, birdlike cock of the head. “Working
for a scandal sheet has its advantages. Sure it’s out for sensation even
if it has to knock the corners off the truth to get it. And yes, it has
done a lot of damage to some good people, but I have to say there’s not
as much of that as there was, and there will be less. But you know, I
can investigate a lot of things the respectable press wouldn’t touch.
Invent a pill that really does cure arthritis and I’ll run the story
next week while your kind—sorry, Doctor—hide it away for six years of
animal and human tests and evaluations. Meanwhile, millions of people
will go on hurting with any real hope. I can maybe get them no pills,
but I can get them the hope.… I’m making a speech.”

“It’s a good speech,” said McCambridge. “Make more.”

Szigeti looked startled, then grateful. “If there is a really genuine
saucer landing or Bigfoot sighting, I guarantee someone like me will be
there first, because I get there fast because I want it to be real, and
not like a _Time_ or _Newsweek_ researcher who gets there slowly because
he or she wants it denied. Not only that: who buys my paper? Mostly
people checking out at supermarkets—all kinds of people with their eggs
and bread and toothpaste and deodorants. They’ll talk to me in ways they
never would to reporters from the glossy press. They will tell me what
they believe and what they want to believe. I can start more of a
groundswell through and through the population before the big-name
newsmagazines even know it’s there; and that goes for the wire services
and broadcast as well … and sometimes they never do know it’s there
until some joker wins an election by a ninety percent landslide, all the
polls upset, all the experts with egg on their faces.… The media talk to
each other, Doctor. It’s easy to see that the people who write for the
_Atlantic Monthly_ and the ‘little’ literary poetry magazines write only
for the people who read them. It isn’t as easy to see that same thing is
true of the national press. I write for everybody there is.”

“I like it. I especially like your use of the word _media_ as a plural.”
McCambridge leaned back to smile. “I’m glad you came.”

Szigeti’s lips performed a brief whimsical twist. “That,” he said, “I’m
really not used to from people like you.”

“There are no people like me,” said McCambridge without arrogance. “Yes,
it _is_ an epidemic.”

There is an experience that should have its own special term; it is the
experience of running up six steps of a five-step flight of stairs, and
falling flat at the top. Szigeti, when he had recovered from this
metaphorical disorientation, slowly brought out his notebook, by his
expression asking permission.

McCambridge waved his hand. “Go ahead.” When the reporter had found his
page, he said, “It’s a viroid. A new one.”

“Did you say virus?”

“I said _viroid_. It’s a weird little thing. ‘Little.’ That’s an
understatement. I mean _small.…_ When viruses were first discovered,
they used to call them ‘filterable viruses.’ Nobody had ever seen one;
nobody ever did until the electron microscope was invented. They were
discovered when it was found that a filter fine enough to strain out
bacteria was not fine enough to filter out viruses. It was found that
the fluid that came through the filter could cause virus diseases, and
for a time it was thought that the fluid itself was some sort of
disease-causing solution, a liquid organic chemical. But finally the
virus was identified for what it is—a kind of metalife, a sort of living
crystal. You know what these filters were made of?”

Szigeti shook his head.

“Porcelain. And if they can get through porcelain, they can get through
almost anything, even rubber. That’s the virus. The viroid is _much_
smaller. It’s nothing but a little fleck of nucleic acid that acts like
a bit of DNA without the protein coding that DNA has. These
technicalities aren’t exactly sensational.”

“Not yet.”

“Well then, here it comes. Nobody knows how many, or how many _kinds_ of
these dustmotes are drifting around in the organic machinery. Most of
’em just get lost. One or two, however, do seem to be specific. There’s
one that causes a kind of lymphoma, a kind of leukemia. It does this by
slipping into the DNA molecule and replacing one of the—what you might
call—the control modules. The thing is, this altered DNA replicates. I
mean, all that can happen pretty fast.

“That’s enough background. What we have here is a viroid that drifts
around in the blood and lymph systems until it encounters the unique
structure of a fertilized egg, and does something—we don’t know what—to
the whole egg factory itself. What happens then is that the fertilized
ovum goes on to the uterus in a normal way, attaches itself to the wall,
and then goes wild. In six weeks or so the body recognizes that
something’s going on that’s not quite right, and right on schedule
menstruation—now called SA, spontaneous abortion—occurs, and out comes
the damaged fetus. Just as well, too; in no way could it come to term.”

“I get it. But what about my idea that from then on the woman can’t
conceive any more?”

“I was coming to that. The other thing this altered DNA does—oh, and
it’s such a tiny, minuscule thing—is to slightly change the outer
integument of the ripening ovum, so that sperm can’t penetrate it. Maybe
it’s tougher, or maybe, like a normal fertilized egg, it sends out a
signal that conception has already occurred. Every egg that ripens after
that will do the same thing.… I have to say I’m impressed. We have
people up to their necks in this research, and not one of them has
really understood what this means. And you do.”

“Somebody once used the phrase ‘to think the unthinkable, one must
accept the unacceptable,’ ” said the reporter. “I was born with a head
that does that, and it hasn’t always been an asset, because it produces
mountains of nonsense. Just once in a while it comes up with a nugget.”

“A statistical necessity,” smiled McCambridge. “Shovel enough manure,
and you’re bound to discover a horse.”

Szigeti laughed briefly, sobered, and said, “Maybe this comes from a
layman’s ignorance, but if this change in the whole body’s DNA happens,
doesn’t it become heritable?”

“It does.”

Szigeti placed his hands flat on the pages of his notebook and lowered
his head. There was a long silence, in which McCambridge could almost
hear the flickering, the penetrations of many points here, and here, and
here, of a polished, needle-pointed mental rapier. He was even aware of
the very moment when the needle sank into the only possible penetrable
target.

Szigeti raised his head slowly. His face was pale. “How contagious is
this?”

“Very.”

“How much of it is there by now?”

McCambridge slid open his flat central drawer and withdrew a stack of
teletypes. He passed them across to the reporter—eleven pages, a list.
“These are the locations of known outbreaks. It is certainly partial.
The compilation is made only from the discovery of only one case in each
location, and where there is one, there will be more. Yes, my friend,
there is an epidemic.”

Szigeti leafed through the sheets. “What’s causing it?” He whispered.

McCambridge shrugged. “What do you like? Sunspots. Pollution.
Recombinants escaped from a laboratory. A mad scientist. International
terrorists. A superpower out to dominate the world. A master criminal
with the secret cure, with blackmail and ransom in mind. Aliens from
outer space. Your choice, Mr. Szigeti; all grist to the mill. Especially
your mill.”

Szigeti put the teletypes down as if afraid they might explode. “You
can’t joke about this. This is the end of the world.”

“Live with it as long as I have and you’ll joke about it. You’ll have
to.”

“I’m sorry. Yes, of course.” For at least the third time the reporter
looked at McCambridge as if he were seeing something, someone,
altogether new. “Where did it begin? You people know where flu strains
begin; you give them names: Australia, Hong Kong.”

McCambridge tapped the teletypes. “Can you tell from looking at these?”

“No way. It’s all over.” He looked up. “In more ways than one. It’s all
over,” he said again, convincing that within himself which refuse to
believe. “There is no cure?”

Again McCambridge answered without answering.

“No prevention?”

“Celibacy. Not,” he added ironically, “that that’s cured anything so far
except maybe joy.… And my fairly well-educated guess is that this
minuscule little pile of chemicals is going to have its way eventually
even with celibates. Widespread enough, the viroid would be happy to
travel on cases and sneezes. Why not? Viruses do, some of ’em. And any
exposed male is a carrier. Like with some yeast infections, the male has
no symptoms and can still carry. Difference is, with this one, he has no
symptoms and he will carry, once exposed.”

“How … how long do we have?”

“The human race? Why, everybody now alive will live a long and happy
life. Or a long and unhappy one. Or a short one. Beyond that I have
nothing to say.… Mr. Szigeti—don’t look at me that way. I know I handed
you a blockbuster, but you’re making me feel like the messenger in the
old days bringing bad news, knowing the king would have them killed
because of it.”

“I—God, I don’t think you caused the epidemic.”

“I’m relieved to hear that. Now go write your scoop. And—Szigeti—keep in
touch. I like you.”

The reporter went to the door, turned, tried to speak, took out his
handkerchief, blew his nose, departed.

Top scientist says:

THIS IS THE END OF THE WORLD

Worldwide Epidemic Sterilizes Women

Dr. Gerald Macomb McCambridge of the internationally famous Genetic
Laboratories stated, in an exclusive interview with this paper, that
mankind faces extinction within two generations. His assertion—a highly
contagious disease has appeared all over the world and will result in
the inability of women everywhere to bear children—is borne out by
reports from an increasing number of doctors and hospitals of the
appearance of the mysterious plague.

Not since the dreaded Black Plague of the Middle Ages has there been.…

“Honey, you feel all right?”

“I feel just fine.”

“Look here what it says in the paper.”

“… loss of the fertilized ovum in six weeks, and thereafter incapable of
…’ but I couldn’t’ve had that; I tell you, I got no plague, I feel
fine.”

“Well, it says here there are no other symptoms, that … here it is:
‘otherwise the disease has no other effect.’ ”

“Well, anything to sell the paper, you know that. I tell you, there’s
nothing wrong, I feel just fine.… Oh Sammy, I’m scared. I’m so scared.…”

A clothing manufacturer in downtown Los Angeles began production of
filmy ladies’ T-shirts emblazoned with the words: I’VE HAD IT.

Breaking the news in this way was a stroke of genius. The ink was still
wet on the first printing when Dr. McCambridge’s phone rang. It was an
attorney suggesting himself as Dr. McCambridge’s counsel in a lawsuit
against the paper for malicious defamation. McCambridge suggested that
the attorney go back to chasing ambulances; he was out of his league.
And after that no one called Dr. McCambridge on the subject of the
epidemic for three days. The news was soaking up from below; so many
believed nothing that ‘scandal sheet’ ever printed that the truth came
to them gradually. By the time the wire services began to be aware of
the story, by the time city editors got around to sending out reporters,
by the time broadcast news directors got their writers banging out their
scripts on the big-type typewriters, more than half the population knew.

After the three days, of course, it was trickle to flood to deluge.
McCambridge gave interviews to the top three newsmagazines, two wire
services, three women’s magazines, and the raunchiest pornography
monthly on the market (on the grounds the porn mag would reach all the
readers the other magazines did not). Thereafter he dictated a cassette
(which he rephrased every forty-eight hours, calling each an ‘update’),
left standing orders not to be disturbed by anyone, particularly doctors
and politicians, and hid in his lab, ostensibly in search of a
cure—which was a lie.

It was pretty wild at first: a rush to the churches and temples,
sometimes by the most improbable people; a flood tide of aggression
against persons, against nations, quelled almost immediately by a larger
tide of sobriety, reflection, self-examination. Acquisition—of goods,
companies, funds—went to unheard-of peaks and then plunged as more and
more people began to wonder if it were really useful to own such a lot
for such a little. Regrettably, there were some suicides, but the
overall suicide rate began to decline; why accelerate the inevitable?

McCambridge called Szigeti in. The young reporter was sallow, drawn; if
he continued to carry whatever it was that burdened him, he would not be
called ‘young’ very much longer.

“I’ve been thinking about a cure,” said McCambridge.

“Who hasn’t?” said Szigeti dolefully.

“And I wanted your thoughts.”

“You wanted _my_ thoughts?”

“Get off the ‘awe’ bit,” McCambridge said testily. “I like the way your
head works and I don’t think it works like mine. So throw mine and yours
into the same hopper and we’ll turn the handle; something new might
grind out.”

Szigeti leaned back, closed his eyes. “Thoughts about a cure.” He was
silent for a time. He opened his eyes. “We need it; that’s the bottom
line.” He paused. “Maybe the planet doesn’t need it; it gets along fine
with extinct species.” (McCambridge nodded approvingly.) “But we damn
well do.” He paused again. “One thing I’ve been lying awake with is if
we could choose among a whole variety of cures, which would be the best
one? I mean, I know that if one can be found right now, we grab it,
whatever it was to go but suppose we had a choice? And what got to me,
from what I’ve learned about this rotten species that I … love so much,
man the destroyer, man the builder … hit me if I get poetic, Doctor.”

“Why on earth should I? Go on.”

“I think if we had a choice of cures, some pretty powerful effort would
be made to see to it that the cure went only to the right kind of
people. White people, say. Or Jews. Or rich people. Or Baptists. I guess
I knew this before, but it wasn’t until the epidemic that I really
_knew_ what I’ve always sort of known: that faced with real disaster, we
tend to hang together, but as soon as the heat is off, it takes only
seconds for ‘Me First’ to show up. So.…” Another long closed-eyes pause.
“So if there ever is a cure, I would hope it was something available to
everybody everywhere, rich, poor, emerging, whatever. Not something
secret and owned by somebody who wanted to be paid for it. Not something
that needed high technology processing … Not that I wouldn’t want to see
that kind of cure, or any other cure.”

“I understand. You’re talking optimums. This is sort of a weird
coincidence, you know.”

“What coincidence?”

“Every bit of our research points to a single possible treatment that
could reverse the viroid effect that’s behind this thing. Nothing known
will attack the viroid directly—not without bombing everything around
it. The only approach is to create an environment in which it can’t
replicate. The only thing that can do this is a very complex protein
that is at one stage lethal, and at another, nutritious. Example: the
akee.”

“The what?”

“Akee. It’s a handsome fruit that grows wild in Jamaica particularly,
though it is happy to grow anywhere with that climate. It’s a strange
looking thing, bright red-orange, with a shiny black pit that is half
inside and half outside the rind. It looks ripe before it is ripe. When
it is ripe it’s delicious, cooked with salt fish—it’s practically a
Jamaican national dish. But if you eat it before it’s ripe it can kill
you.

“Another vegetable with the right characteristics, also a protein
poison, is the fava bean, and this one will grow virtually anywhere that
anything will grow. Eaten raw, it’s pretty deadly. Cooked, it’s very
sustaining, with trace minerals and vitamins, and a really efficient
protein and a good measure of carbohydrates and oil.

“Every test we can devise—and we devise a lot around here—indicates that
at the exact stage at which these poison proteins turn into real food,
they are in an intermediate, interface stage. Catch it there, screen it
out, and feed it to someone with the plague, and it will create an
environment that—well, to avoid the gobbledygook—that coats the viroidal
DNA with glue. It doesn’t kill it or remove it; the viroidal DNA just
can’t _do_ anything, and it dies. It’s replaced by what it’s used to—the
original DNA structure. An ovum fertilized at that time will be normal
and will come to term.”

Szigeti had begun to breathe hard and irregularly, like a hurt child
about to cry. “I think … you’re telling me … that there is a cure.”

McCambridge leaned back and beamed at him. “Yup. And that’s your scoop
for today.”

Szigeti had a new clean handkerchief. Did he change them twice a day?
McCambridge waited until he had put it away and then said, “ ‘Cure’ is a
peculiar name for it, but it can spread fast like any other four-letter
word.”

“I’ve got to know more. Are there any side effects?”

_“Damn it!”_ McCambridge roared. “You’ve just pushed my number one
crusade button. _There are no side effects_, you hear that? There are no
side effects! ‘Side effects’ is a piece of semantic wizardry, a
brainwashing trick, foisted on the world by the marketing people in
so-called ‘ethical’ drug companies. I could write an ad, medical-journal
style, for the Pill, with a big headline—FOR SWOLLEN ANKLES, BLOOD
CLOTS, AND NAUSEA—and a long list in small print of side effects: among
them, _it may act as a contraceptive_. You get what I’m saying? Compound
a drug, you put in big words what you want to do, and in little words
all the other things it does, and you call all those other things side
effects. _There are no side effects!_ You get that? They’re only
_effects_. From now on, any time you find yourself saying ‘side
effects’—bite your tongue!”

“Wow!” said Szigeti admiringly.

McCambridge relaxed, leaned back and laughed, wiping his brow with a
tissue. “I do go off bang sometimes, don’t I? Well: effects. The
vegetable protein I described can be prepared in quantity very cheaply
from akees and fava. Fava especially can be grown anywhere and harvested
quickly. The only precision part of the process is to get the transitory
stage out of the product and isolate it, but that can be done with
automatic machinery. What you come up with is a gray-green paste that
tastes kind of good until you realize it’s going to be your sole
sustenance for two months or more. And I mean sole sustenance; anything
else, even salt, with it and you’ve diluted or canceled it. And it won’t
work.

“And that isn’t the only _effect_. The nutritious protein sustains the
patient adequately, but there’s enough of the poisonous protein left in
it to make the patient feel nauseated a lot of the time, with occasional
dizziness, double vision, and the like. _And_ some of the hair will fall
out and the skin will get scaly and dry.”

“Both men and women?”

“Only women. Men would have the same symptoms, but there’s no immunity.
The viroid’s too widespread; it just wouldn’t do any good.”

“You mean people will have to go through this every time they want a
child?”

“They will. Of course, the ultimate reward is that they will have a
child. Also,” he added, “the hair will grow back better than before and
the skin will recover without fine wrinkles, really renewed.”

“But surely medical technology can get to a one-shot treatment. You’ve
done it before.”

McCambridge snorted. “How long has it taken medical technology to find a
one-shot cure for rabies—the very first disease subject to a miracle
treatment? No, my friend, not with this bug. It’s the nature of the
beast. We’ll keep trying, of course, but this is another one like the
rabies cure; we’re stuck with a primitive, painful course of treatment
for years and years to come. But Szigeti—we’ll have those years now and
we’ll have them for everybody. Go write it, boy; it’s all yours. And—my
regards to your wife and kid. Kids.”

Heard all over the world, in many languages:

“If you think for one minute I’m going through that just have your kid,
buster, you better think again.”

“I know I don’t have to take the treatment with you, Sue, but I want to.
I want to go through what you go through.” “You can’t.” “Why can’t I?”
“Because you can’t have a baby, and I can. Because I’m a woman, Eve’s
curse, you know. And even if I get bald and crinkly, I don’t want a
lover with his dear hair falling out.” “Oh, I love you.”

“I saw one of them today, she wore a veil over her whole head and face.
And everyone stood aside for her, like she was something holy. Because
she would have a baby.”

“Sell your rubber stock and get into akee orchards. There’s a classic
buck in akee orchards.”

A long time later.

“Hello … Dr. McCambridge?”

“Hello … Wacky? Whickter?”

“Dr. Whickter here, yes.”

“Why the formality?”

“Because this may be the last word I ever speak to you. I wouldn’t even
go this far but for a sense of fairness. I need my suspicions confirmed,
and I want to know if you can possibly explain your motives. Or defend
them.”

“Oh my, oh my, you are on a high horse. What wickedness do you think
I’ve committed?”

“What wickedness?…” (hard breathing.) “… Let me put it this way: What
would a man have to be to concoct a dangerous disease and bring the
whole world to the brink of ultimate extinction, just to snatch it back
again at the last moment?”

“He’d have to be damned accomplished,” said McCambridge gleefully. “He
might even have a cure first.”

“I’m in a special position to figure this out,” said the telephone.
“I’ve known a man like that for very long time. Very well. He would have
to have almost unlimited funding. He’d have to have a profound
background in genetics and biology and molecular theory. He’d have to
have been a top consultant on population growth, and have traveled all
over the world for many years where he saw the very worst effects of
exploding populations. He’d have to have a special group of loyal
undergraduates of every ethnic variety to touch off a manufactured
plague simultaneously in so many places that the source could never be
discovered. And he’d have to be an obsessive, arrogant son of a bitch.”

“Oh, you forgot a couple of things, Wacky. He’d have to have a pheromone
so ingeniously compounded that it would make his operative irresistible
to women—but only to women who were ovulating.”

“There is no such thing.”

“You’re right. But let’s hypothesize that there were. Let us recall that
all female mammals undergo a period of estrus, heat, rut. When that
happens there are glandular changes of many kinds affecting the animal
and its surroundings and behaviors in many ways.”

“But not human females.”

“Not human females. Yet at the time of ovulation there are certain
traces of that phenomenon. Mittelschmerz, the sharp abdominal pain some
women feel at the moment a ripe ovum moves out. Certain changes of mood,
of body and breath odors, of susceptibility—like and dislike—of external
odors. More women surrender to seduction and even rape when they are
ovulating than when they are not. Granted these things are almost
disappearingly subtle, the fact is that they are there, buried in the
complexities of the white brain and the endocrines. Vestigial they might
be, but so is the abductor minimi digit muscle on the outside of your
foot, and it can be brought back by the right stimulus, or even by
concentration. So! If such an agent is armed with a pheromone so
designed that it totally reactivates estrus in the highest, brainless,
gland-driven form, and if he has a second weapon in its way just as
powerful, it would not be difficult at all to scatter the seed in the
most efficient way. Of course,” he added quickly, overriding the
sputtering from the telephone, “such a supreme aphrodisiac does not
exist, if it ever did. An ethical person would see to it that it was
destroyed utterly, beyond discovery or recovery.”

Whickter’s snortings revealed an inner conflict; then: “What second
weapon?”

“I don’t know, of course, but I was told about it a long time ago by an
old college chum. It’s a line, a single sentence. I was told that the
student who used it batted a thousand. He would simply say, at the right
tender moment, “I want an experience. I do not want an affair.” He used
to say that there were millions of women just aching to hear someone say
that; who had many fantasies but who were afraid to go for them for fear
of involvement and entanglements.”

“You really are a son of a bitch,” said Whickter; but he laughed. He
then said sententiously, “But I still can’t see any decency in a man’s
bringing about worldwide terror just to satisfy an obsession about
overpopulation.”

“Overpopulation?” roared McCambridge. “Is that what you’re thinking?
Gerard O’Neill’s space settlements will take care of overpopulation
forever. The Club of Rome was wrong: there are no limits to growth, not
for this species.”

Then he said very quietly, “No, Wacky; whoever did it, did it so that
never, never again on this world or within this species, will there be
such a thing as an unwanted child.”



BLACK MOCCASINS


Even though Laughlin had damn well made up his mind, he hesitated,
looking up at the fourth-floor front. It was evening, just dark enough
to make the lights come on in the apartments, and her light was on all
right, and it wasn’t shining through blue drapes anymore.

Pink.

_Blue is for boys; pink is for girls_, he thought sardonically,
squinting up. Not that he cared if she had any boys up there. That’s
what he’d told her, anyway.

And anyway, it wasn’t really pink. Salmon. He walked up to the front
entrance and into the foyer with the whole wall full of mail-slots and
the two tall rows of pushbuttons with name-tags, one row on each side of
the brass speaker grille. Habit twitched his hand toward his pocket,
toward the keys he didn’t have anymore.

_Salmon_, how about that. He reached to thumb the button marked B4, but
stopped when he saw the tag. Square white letters on black, it didn’t
say just LAUGHLIN anymore. It said M. SVOBODA-LAUGHLIN. With a hyphen.
Svoboda was her maiden name. _A hyphen. How about that_.

He thumbed the button. The bars on the speaker grille combed her voice
out thin. “Yes?”

“Me.”

She didn’t answer with the words, or a word, but the electric lock
buzzed and he pushed the door open. He used to go up the stairs two at a
time. Quicker. Keep in shape. Get to the door breathing hard, it always
made her laugh, or anyway smile. This time he walked past the stairs and
took the elevator. Slower.

Down the corridor to B4. Another button to push. He had an idea that she
stood just inside, purposely waiting a little before she opened the
door, but why would she do that?

She opened the door. “Maudie.”

“Hello, Flip.” She turned away, hardly looking at him, and walked
inside, leaving him to come in and closed the door. He did, and followed
her into the living room. With a light on this side, the drapes weren’t
salmon. Burnt something. Siena.

She turned to face him, saying, “You’re looking—” at the same time he
was saying, “well …” so they both stopped. She said, “Sit down. Want
coffee?”

“No,” he said and suddenly became aware of that posture, with a small
fist pushed into the small palm, the eyes studying the hands, which
meant tension, waiting, not knowing what to expect; and he realized that
his “no” might have meant about sitting, or about coffee, and she didn’t
know which or what that might mean. He sat down. Her hands came apart
and she said, “I’ll get coffee.” She went through the archway into the
little kitchen and ran water, while he looked around the room. The big
chair and the couch were the same. There was a new fuzzy rug, yellow,
small, laid right over the wall-to-wall carpet. He thought with some
reluctance that it really didn’t look too bad with those drapes. The
mantle over the artificial fireplace was empty. He called out, “You
could’ve kept the horse.”

Her voice drifted out to him, “Oh no … you always, well, I mean, it was
really yours, the horse. Unicorn.”

Which brought back the anger-pain, the tender-anger, the
there’s-really-no-name for it two hours they had spent separating their
stuff, each of them determined to take this, too willing to yield that.
It had been pretty awful. And anyway, once he’d taken the unicorn, he’d
found no real room for it at his place. He opened his mouth to suggest
that he bring it back some time but closed it again. The one thing he
was really sure about in this awkward moment was that she wouldn’t get
the idea he had come here to initiate a series of visits. What he should
do is just pick up his box and go. It was right there waiting for him at
the bottom of the oh.

Bedroom closet.

He discovered that he had half risen; that he had actually begun to get
up to go back there into the bedroom to pick up the one thing she’d
agreed to keep for him. He sank back down, hot-faced. Not that he cared
one way or the other, but what would she think, coming back in here to
find him gone, rummaging around in the …

“Flip—I—” She was standing in the archway to the kitchen. “Maude, I was
thinking, why don’t I just—” and again they spoke simultaneously and
stopped. At which point the whistling teakettle began to scream, and she
ducked back out of his sight.

_This is just too stupid_, he thought in sudden indignation. Hadn’t he
already said he didn’t want coffee? So all right, she was tense, well,
so was he; perfectly understandable. All he wanted was the box of junk
she was keeping for him; so take it and go.

“Here’s your coffee,” she said, coming out of the kitchen with the tray,
the oval one with the butterfly wings under its glass floor. That had
been his mother’s; he never had been crazy about it but Maude just loved
it. She’d made herb tea herself too. She never drank coffee. She set the
tray down on the coffee table. It had the cream in it already, and for
sure, honey. He never took sugar. She sat down, not beside him, but in
the occasional chair across from him.

Oh, well.… “I came for my box.”

“You said,” she replied briefly. “When you called.”

He picked up his cup. Mug. A pedestal mug, blue and white, with a thick
handle. It felt good to his hand. It felt good against his mouth and the
coffee against his tongue was just right, which for some reason
infuriated him. He looked across at her. She had not touched her tea.
She was looking intently at him, pressing one fist into her other palm,
and when she met his eyes, dropped her gaze.

He said, “I’ve been thinking … if it’s all the same to you, that box is
full of just junk. I mean, the stamp catalog is way out of date and I’ve
really got no more use for the magazines. That tool set, well, there’s
no way to get another lens for it.” It was a kind of flashlight with a
transparent dome with a chuck on it, which could hold a variety of tools
and a screw-starter; the very first time he had used it with a
screwdriver the dome had cracked. He’d never seen another like it; he’d
had it for years. “And the chinchilla book, well, let’s face it, I’m
never going to have a chinchilla farm. I’m sorry it all took up so much
sp—so much of your space, Maudie. All I really want out of it is the
black moccasins.”

The black moccasins.… A long time before he met and married Maud Svoboda
he’d worn those moccasins—and worn them and worn them. In the years
before he’d acquired the dealership, he had at times been very poor;
there had been long stretches when the black moccasins were the only
shoes he had. Sometimes he couldn’t even afford the liquid scuff polish
that suited them so well, especially when they creased and developed
little breaks in the high points of the cracks. And although he kept
them glossy, age and usage took their toll. There were times when he was
careful not to elevate his feet or to sit on the grass or a bleacher in
such a way that the holes in the soles might show. For all that, they
were the most comfortable footwear he ever had; and they were more than
that; they were trusted old companions.

For a while he drove an ancient VW, and the hole in the sole of his left
shoe grew so large that once in a while it would capture the little
clutch pedal on the left shoe. And one day, crossing a parking lot, he
walked carelessly through the remnants of a broken bottle, ground almost
to its original sand by repeated crushing by automobile tires. But a
sliver of glass—no more, really, than a thorn or splinter, ran into his
foot—a sharp reminder that measures should be taken.

Flip Laughlin, in those early days, was a connoisseur of the
“day-old”—his name not only for past-date baked goods, but that basket
in the rear corner of supermarkets where dwelt bent cans, broken
cartons, punctured and taped bags of rice and flour, and the like, all
at very reduced prices. The preoccupation extended to special sales,
“cents-off” offers, double coupons, and rebates. He always felt
triumphant, a beater of the system, when he had taken advantage of these
tattered temptations and generous gifts from the loss-leading
fraternity.

And so it came about that on the very day he felt the bee-sting of glass
in the ball of his foot, he parked his old car and saw, in the gutter, a
discarded pair of shoes. The uppers were worn and torn, but the bottoms
of one-piece, superfirm sole and heel, had well outworn the uppers, and
were in fine condition. Flip Laughlin, grinning, snapped open the Buck
knife he always carried on his belt, and sliced off the ruined tops. He
had in his secret hoard a three-dollar refund from a motor-oil company,
and just that morning he’d noticed an advertisement for a $16 glue gun,
which applied heated glue which cooled into firmness in less than a
minute—and it was on sale for three days for nine dollars. He bought
one, applying the rebate check to the deal, and therefore wound up with
his shoes renewed sufficiently to double their already long life, and
had a glue gun to boot. Judicious application of his liquid scuff polish
and a touch of the hot glue to the occasionally reappearing holes and
cracks in the worn uppers kept the old moccasins fitting and friendly
for years.

Maud had hated them from the day she saw them, but she quickly became
aware of what they meant to Flip, to whom they were a pride and a badge
of thrift and ingenuity, even after he became prosperous, and he wore
them often.

All of this, with a charge of affection and pride for himself and the
treasured old shoes, were in his voice now as he said …“All I really
want out of the box is the black moccasins.”

He lifted the pedestaled mug to his lips and sipped on the good coffee,
and looked over the rim at Maud, who sat pressuring her hands, who
dropped her eyes, who said, “But you didn’t put them in the box, Flip.”

“I thought I did.”

“Really you didn’t. You packed the box yourself, and you said …”

_“Maud!”_

Her voice dropped almost a whisper. “… you said to throw everything else
out.”

“You didn’t!”

Her silence, her rounded eyes, answered him.

He put his mug down with a bang. A little brown tongue of coffee jeered
up at him and collapsed back into the cup. “But you _know_ what they
meant to me!”

She said, still fearfully but with a certain asperity, “Flip Laughlin,
you threw out quite a lot of things that meant a lot to you that day!”

He shook his head slowly side to side. “My mocs. My old black mocs.…” He
was too shocked even to feel anger.

“Flip … I’m as sorry as I can be.” She put out a hand as if to touch
him, then left it extended, as if forgotten. Speechless, he simply
looked at her for a long moment, and then stood up.

She rose to, briefly flicking her gaze right and left, looking for
something, looking for some way to—“Flip, wait. Wait! Don’t.…”

“Don’t what?”

“I shouldn’t ask you, I … guess. The box. It’s awful heavy. Would you …”

A twisted thing rose in Flip Laughlin at that; something like, if he did
her a favor at this point it would be a punishment for her—although you
certainly could not have expressed it that way. But he said, “Where is
it?”

She turned and he followed her into the bedroom. The bedroom. The
bedroom. The same old granny crazy-quilt. She opened the closet door and
he stepped past her, backhanding a long skirt of that turquoise dress
she wore that time at the.… There was the box. He bent to get his
fingers under it and saw, gleaming beside it, the black moccasins.
Dumbfounded, he stood up, holding them.

They were new black moccasins, glove-soft, hand-stitched, smooth as a
woman’s cheek inside. He turned to stare at her.

She said with difficulty, “Just exactly your size.”

He looked from her to the moccasins. All he could say was “Years. It
would take years.”

“Yes,” she whispered. “And you can wear them every single day. You can
wear them wherever we go.”

Something happened to Flip Laughlin then that had never happened in all
his life, and was not to happen ever again in all his years. He uttered
a long bleat, and burst into terrible tears, and when he came to himself
he was lying on the crazy-quilt in his wife’s arms with a shoe in each
hand.



THE TRICK


Michaelmas was fifty-five, hale and sharp and very alive. Sounds like a
song lyric, don’t it? Well, he felt like a song lyric. His business was
Big Business, and he’d made it to the top. But it wasn’t always so. He
was first to admit that he climbed up there on other people’s faces. He
been all the names you know: miser, skinflint, robber baron, all that.

Until Apricot.

Not apricot the jam, the jelly, the little peach, the sweetmeat (sweet
as her meat might be), but Apricot the girl. It was Apricot, who, way
back when, took to visiting veterans’ hospitals (which damn few people
ever do) and discovered how little attention was being paid to whatever
personal parts they (the residents) had that had not been shot off.
She’d rounded up a crew of like-minded girls to minister to these
matters in bed.

It was Apricot who, upon finding the results so beneficial, widened her
group’s attention to men who had paraplegia of the mind and heart (if
you follow me), men like Mr. Michaelmas used to be. They kidnapped
Michaelmas and other men like that, hid them, fed them, fucked them
until they got their juices running again, and turned them loose on the
world to use their clout for doing good things. But that’s another
story.…

“I’ve got a problem,” Michaelmas said one dark-of-the-morning from his
side of the bed.

“You can’t prove it by me,” Apricot said comfortably from her side of
the bed. “You’re great, and you know it.”

“I said, I’ve got a problem. I didn’t say it was _my_ problem.” He drew
the sheet down away from her breast because he liked looking at it in
the soft light. It wasn’t curiosity because this breast was a good
friend of his. And it wasn’t lust because—for the moment—he’d happily
used that up. He just liked it. “It’s Square Adam’s problem, but that
makes it mine. He’s my export manager; one of the best men I’ve
got_—was_,” he added.

Apricot was looking at the nipple too. One of the nicest things about
Apricot was how openly she liked what she had. “Square Adam?”

“His name is Adam Adams—Adams _squared_, get it? It’s a sort of ‘in’
joke around the office because he’s, honest to Pete, about as square as
they come! Anyway, we call him Square Adam. But he isn’t worth a damn
right now. He mopes. He forgets. He looks you right in the eye and
doesn’t hear you; so you have to say whatever it is all over. He’s even
biting his fingernails.”

“Woman trouble,” Apricot nodded.

“_Wife_ trouble.”

“How’d you find that out?”

“Nothing to it! All I had to do was lock my office door, swear I
wouldn’t let him out until he told me what the trouble was, talk to him
steadily for ninety minutes and feed him three double martinis—and he’s
not a drinking man. No trouble.”

He leaned over and gently kissed the nipple, which responded. “I guess I
leaned on him a bit. Well, hell! I’m a financier, not a shrink. And I
don’t know how to do this kind of thing, except to keep on driving until
I find what’s wrong.”

“Not all that many shrinks know that trick,” said Apricot, uncovering
the other breast and nodding at it. They had a game they played,
something about never getting lopsided. “So what’s wrong?”

Michaelmas took care of the other nipple and sighed. “Monday nights.
_Thursday_ nights. Always in the dark! Always in the same bed—hers.”

“You don’t mean _twin_ beds?”

“I do mean twin beds. He comes. She comes.”

“_She_ comes?!” Apricot said. “Okay, then what?”

“He washes.”

“He washes. What does she do?”

“She cries. He goes back to his bed and goes to sleep.”

Apricot turned to rest on one elbow, facing him. The low light came
through her hair. This hair of hers was the color of apricots, all of
it; her eyes, almost. He wondered which came first, her coloring or her
name.

“All he has to do, Mr. Mike—”

“Little Ape, excuse me but I know all he has to do. He has to make it
with her in the morning, on the floor, in the kitchen, end-to-end, with
mouth, teeth and eyebrows all over. He doesn’t know how. He doesn’t know
_her_. She was brought up to believe (I’m quoting a famous psychiatrist)
that ‘sex is dirty, ugly, and disgusting, and you got to save it for
your husband.’ So was he, really. They were both virgins when they
married.”

“He could read a book.…”

“He did read a book. His daddy gave it to him the week before the
wedding. It was called _The Marriage Bed_. It was published in 1918.
That’s where he got the Monday-and-Thursday bit.”

“And washing.”

“No, his mother told him that. Anyway, if he tried that super-jock
number on her now, he’d drive her even farther away from him than she
already is.

“Ape … look … we can’t put these kids down. They’re good people. He is
the best piece of manpower I found in years, and she’s a pretty little
thing—cute and bright. She treats him now as something between a
stranger and an enemy, and it gets worse every day. They still do their
thing on Mondays and Thursdays, and they both hate it, and it’s driving
Adam out of his gourd.”

Being a woman, Apricot asked, “Didn’t he ever ask her why she cries?”

“Once. Two weeks ago. And she said, ‘I didn’t want to come!’ Then she
cried all night.”

Surprisingly, Apricot said, “That’s a helpful sign,” she lay for a
while, musing. Michaelmas stayed quiet, watching her. He did like
watching her. “And she won’t go out and get laid? Guess not. That would
destroy Adam. And her too, probably. H-m-m …” A moment later she sat up
briskly. “I’ll call O’Toole!”

With “I _knew_ you’d think of something!” Michaelmas said happily.
“Who’s O’Toole?”

“I’ll tell you,” she said, “but not now. You’ve done something to my
nipples, and they’re downright noisy.”

“Oh,” Michaelmas said, “I can fix that.” And surprisingly, he ducked
under the covers. Apricot wasn’t able to see his hand snake down the
side of the bed and snatch something up from the refreshment tray on the
floor. He feather-fingered the insides of her thighs until they parted,
and he began to gently massage the burnished thicket where they joined.

“M-m-m …” she crooned, and lay back, completely relaxed.

Turning his palm upward, he stroked the warm cleft over and over,
gently, gently—until it too parted, and he felt the swelling, the
beginning of the wetness, the easy smoothness of her arousal. Now it was
easy to slip the end of his middle finger inside, to widen the aperture,
to penetrate deeper … gently, gently … and to move out a little, in a
lot, out a little, in a lot.… Apricot sighed.

He hooked his finger upward and, more gently than ever, found that magic
spot behind the pubic bone, the one that even Masters and Johnson didn’t
mention in their book. He rested the pad of his finger on it while he
brought his mouth close; then all at once he withdrew the finger, placed
his lips on the quivering opening and shot into her waiting vagina the
ice cube he had palmed out of the silver champagne bucket on the floor.

Apricot screamed, but by the time she could draw another full breath,
his tongue was generating vibratory shocks on her clitoris. She screamed
again, this time a totally different kind of scream, and came with a
spastic orgasm the likes of which even Michaelmas, who was very active
these days, had never imagined or even hoped for. His revived, old organ
was just as pleased and astonished as Apricot was—and ready. He lost no
time in rearing up and plunging it into her. Oh, yes, it was cold in
there—but not for long. They came together, thunderously, and for a
moment lay linked, somewhere near oblivion.

When they could breathe again, which took a while, she laughed. “You
devil! You’ve been reading books.”

“Not really,” Michaelmas said. “Just thinking a lot, making plans.…” He
never knew if she was about to tell him who O’Toole was, because he
suddenly fell asleep.

O’Toole was tall and wide, and had a muted voice that reminded
Michaelmas of a fine brass wire brush wrapped in silk. He wore hundreds
of dollars’ worth of gabardine and low boots, and his beautifully
manicured hands were as competent as a bench vise. When he was
introduced to Adam’s wife, Prue, he looked at her twice, as if he
couldn’t believe his eyes. Michaelmas saw that she noticed and had
colored, lightly, and that her husband had not noticed.

They trooped downstairs to a ground-floor restaurant that served
everything Michaelmas liked (he owned it). O’Toole sat beside him,
across from the Adamses. They were a handsome, unhappy couple: Adam the
very picture of the young executive on the rise; and Prue … ah, Prue,
flawless ivory skin, compact figure with tiny wrists, huge blue eyes and
a helmet of blue-black hair falling away to a dark cape over her
shoulders. She looked as if she had been taken out of a box, and the
cellophane crackled away.

Cocktails and lunch passed pleasantly. O’Toole, obviously well briefed,
said business things to Adam and Michaelmas, and gentle social things to
Prue from time to time. Over the coffee, Michaelmas asked Prue if she
could spare her husband the next day, a Wednesday; he wouldn’t be back
until Thursday at noon, and then he’d have to come straight to the
office.

“I don’t mind,” she said, and she didn’t.

“I was so sure you would say yes that I had Adam booked for a 9 AM
flight tomorrow. Can you handle it, Adam?”

“Anything you say, Mr. Michaelmas.”

“Good. Sue Benson will have the tickets and car and hotel reservations
on desk before four o’clock. I want you to go to Abingdon, to a firm
called Fleming Educational. Mr. Fleming himself will see you. And I’d
like you to take a careful look at everything he’ll want to show you,
and come back on Thursday and give me your opinion about acquiring the
company.”

“Thursday,” said Adam agreeably.

They parted politely, O’Toole and Prue going their separate ways,
Michaelmas and Adam sharing an elevator. With an immense effort of will
Michaelmas waited until he was alone in the office before he let himself
chuckle and rub his hands in glee at the way Prue tried so hard all
during lunch not to look at O’Toole. And her flicker of a smile every
time he said anything amusing, or maybe “Pass the salt, please.”
_Hooked_, thought Michaelmas, happily. _Or anyway, following the bait
with her mouth wide open_.

Friday morning Michaelmas stirred in the big bed in the large bedroom
behind the private office and opened his eyes. Apricot was on her
elbows, smiling at him.

“Well, good morning!” she said. “Really knocked yourself out, didn’t
you? I no sooner got here, all eager to tell you all about it, when you
suddenly had my mouth full. What turned you so way on?”

Michaelmas laughed and yawned at the same time. “Thinking about the
doin’s at the Adams residence, I guess. I talked to Fleming yesterday.”

“And I talked to O’Toole.”

“Really sump’n, ain’t he? Are you going to tell me what his trick is?
That’s all you’d say, ‘He has this trick he does.’ ”

Apricot laughed. “No, I won’t. He will. I made so bold as to ask Sue to
call him and get him over here this morning.”

“What I get for trusting you,” he said with mock grumpiness. “Suspense,
that’s what.”

“Well, tell me all about Fleming Educational.”

Michaelmas laughed. “It was educational, all right. Square Adam was
gulping like a goldfish when he came in after lunch. He typed up a list
of the first films Fleming showed him. I saved it for you.

Here.”

She read aloud: “_Dancing With and Embracing Husband While Fully
Clothed_. What _is_ this?”

“Read on.”

“_Being Kissed on Cheeks and Forehead. Being Kissed on Lips. Sitting on
Husband’s Lap, Both Fully Dressed_. Why the _hussy! Husband Kisses Neck
and Ears. Husband Caresses Neck and Ears. Husband Caresses Neck and
Face_. Raunchy stuff, this, Mr. Mike. Good thing they’re married.”

“Go on, Apricot.”

“_Having Coitus in the Nude in a Living or Dining Room_. Well, it’s
about time. _Changing Positions During Intercourse. Having Intercourse
With Husband in the Nude While Sitting on Husband’s Lap_. Very advanced,
that.”

Laughing, Michaelmas took the paper and dropped it on the floor.
“ ‘There were no stories or anything,’ Adam says to me. He looked
anxious, like a little kid who had to go to the bathroom. ‘Just those
titles and then little movies showing all those things. Showing, I mean,
everything,’ he says. ‘There were a lot more,’ he says. ‘I’ll bring over
the rest of the notes after I’ve typed them. I wouldn’t want my
secretary to do it,’ he says. ‘Mr. Michaelmas, I thought I was going to
see _educational_ material.’ ” Michaelmas had to wait until Apricot’s
peal of laughter rang down. “ ‘Mr. Michaelmas,’ he says, more anxious
than ever, ‘what kind of people need this kind of education?’ I had some
kind of choking fit.

“He told me there were lots more films, men and women, men and men,
people tied up, two women and a man, two men and a woman. He said
Fleming just sat there as if nothing unusual was happening. He said he
guessed a person could get hardened to that kind of thing.”

“That part’s not all bad,” Apricot said, and fell back, putting the
pillow over her face so she could shriek.

“But you know,” Michaelmas said, “Fleming told me that Adam put on a
stoneface and never twitched all day. He must have been blown away but
never showed it.”

“What kind of place _is_ it you sent that poor lamb to?”

“Oh, it’s for real. Shrinks use those films in therapy, for people with
various behavior problems. I bet he recommends that we not involve the
firm in that kind of thing. Wonder what he’ll think when he finds out I
already own it … but tell me what happened with O’Toole.”

“Oh, yes!” Apricot sprang up and went into a lotus position in the
middle of the huge bed. Beautiful. “Well, he called her about ten in the
morning, when they could both be sure Square Adam was airborne. Invited
her to lunch. She twittered a bit and tried to make up some appointments
or something to cop out with. But she didn’t try very hard, and he just
had to breathe into the phone until she persuaded herself. I bet it took
her about twelve minutes to get dressed and ready; then she had an hour
to wait. He called for her, and they had a lo-o-ong lunch, and talked to
her in—that voice.…”

“Yeah, that voice,” Michaelmas said. “Makes me feel like Mickey Mouse.”

“Yes, well, they went and sat on the grass in the park, and up to then
he was what’s called a perfect gentleman. And then he asked her if she
had ever been seduced. He said that she gasped as if he’d thrown a
handful of crushed ice on her midriff. He said _he’d_ never seduced
anybody, ‘so let’s pretend that’s what we’re doing. Only, of course we
won’t do it.’ ”

“Hey, wow!”

“So they agreed not to start until she went home and changed, and the
perfect gentleman waited in the living room while she changed from
pretty to beautiful. This time it took hours.”

“A masterstroke.”

“So out they went. They cocktailed at one place and dined someplace
else. And all the while he was doing the seducing bit—just practicing,
you know, he kept telling her; he kept asking her, ‘Do you think I did
that part right?’

“Then he began to tell her all the things he would do when at last they
were alone. It began with—” she giggled, “caressing the neck and hair,
fully clothed. And they danced—the guy dances like flying, Mr. Mike—and
by then it was running his hands over her smooth back while he nibbled
at her earlobes—still all talk, you understand—and at the last bar,
’long about two in the morning, he ordered her a Hawaiian Sunset—”

“A what?”

“Hawaiian Sunset. One third scotch, one third rum, one third peach
brandy. Apricot’s better,” she added.

“Oh, I’ll have the apricot,” he said gallantly.

“No, you won’t. I like you horizontal, Mr. Mike, but only when you can
move. No kidding, it’s so sweet and so smooth, you don’t even know it’s
alcohol until it’s too late. By the time she’d sipped half of it, he was
talking about ‘plunging my throbbing manhood right up to your heart,’
and she was rolling up her eyes and till they were mostly whites and
breathing hard. Upstairs—it was naturally a hotel bar—then, to the room
he hired that morning. He asked her once more for her assurance that he
was doing it all right, the game, and he said she was playing it just
fine too. Once in the room, he told her he was going to go into the
bathroom and strip naked, and that she should strip naked too and get
under the covers. And when he came padding out and whispered her name,
she was to throw the covers off and there she would be.…

“So he strips naked and says, in that voice, ‘Now?’ And she murmurs,
‘Now …’ And he tiptoes across the room with this enormous erection ahead
of him like a bowsprit, and he says, ‘Prue? Li’l Prue?’ And she flings
back the covers, and then he does his trick.”

There was the kind of this disoriented silence that happens for the
first three seconds after a videotape breaks.

“What trick?!” Michaelmas asked.

“I told you. O’Toole has a trick he does. He did his trick, and then
they got dressed, and he took her home, and that’s all.”

“Dammit, woman!” Michaelmas roared in his old skinflint, miser, robber
baron manner, “What the hell happened?”

“Mr. Mike, dear, I love you altogether, but I wouldn’t spoil what comes
next for anything in the world. Even you.”

There was a moment’s tense silence. Then a cultivated female voice spoke
from a corporate walnut speaker grille: “Mr. Michaelmas, there’s a Mr.
O’Toole here to see you.”

Apricot held up five fingers. “Give me five minutes,” Michaelmas called.

“Only five?” The voice clicked off.

Apricot laughed. “Oh, that O’Toole.…” She bounded out of bed and began
to skin into a very formfitting silver jumpsuit. A little less
gracefully and slightly irritated, Michaelmas fumbled into slacks and a
T-shirt and scuffs. Apricot led the way—danced the way—into the
adjoining office. Her eyes sparkled. She waved toward the desk intercom.
Michaelmas threw the key and said, “I’ll see Mr. O’Toole now.”

“Will you ever,” Apricot murmured.

The tall doors swung open, and O’Toole strode in wearing a thin chamois
jacket and matched wool turtleneck, dark-brown slacks and huaraches. He
looked very refreshed. “Morning, Apricot … Mr. Michaelmas,” he rumbled.

“O’Toole,” said Apricot gaily, “we can talk about coffee and the weather
and how you are later, if you don’t mind. But I’ve just told Mr.
Michaelmas everything that happened with you and Prue Adams, up to but
not including the moment you did your trick. And he can’t wait to know
the rest of it, and I can’t wait either.”

“Oh—okay.” Quite unselfconsciously, he unzipped the dark-brown slacks.

“Wait!” Apricot cried. She whirled to the cabinet behind the desk and
took out a Styrofoam cup. “Would you mind?”

“Not at all.” O’Toole hooked one iron thumb into the intricate back of a
heavy, straight chair and slung it out to the middle of the room. He
straddled it in such a way that the corner of the seat was centered
under his crotch. From his open fly he produced the kind of dong that
makes a fair percentage of other men feel that what they have is ding.
On a small triangular platform formed by the corner of the chair,
Apricot carefully placed the Styrofoam cup and stood back.

Michaelmas seemed about to speak, when Apricot said, “Sh-h-h. Watch.”

With no observable effort on O’Toole’s part, his dangling organ snapped
erect with such speed and force that the cup was belted halfway across
the room, whizzing past Michaelmas’s ear.

“Now that,” breathed Michaelmas in an awestruck voice, “that is really a
trick. So … what did you do Wednesday night—bombard that poor lady with
plastic cups?”

Apricot was still applauding. “O’Toole, thank you. Mr. Mike, that was
_not_ his trick … his _other_ trick. O’Toole, I told everything up to
your using the trick. Now I’d like to show Mr. Michaelmas exactly how it
all happened.

“I’ll be Prue Adams. I’m naked. I’m lying in the bed—” She hopped up on
the huge desk and lay down.

“I’m covered with a blanket. You call out from the bathroom, ‘Ready?’
And I say, ‘Ready.’ You’re naked with that nice hard-on. You come across
the room, stop by the bed and call my name. I open my eyes and see that
wonderful tool reaching out for me. I throw the blanket off—you’ll have
to imagine there’s a blanket—and you do your trick. Got it?”

“Got it,” said O’Toole. He extricated himself from the chair. Even from
where he sat, Michael could see the coral tip of that weapon of
O’Toole’s pulsing; and it couldn’t have been more stiff if it had been
splinted with a rat-tail file.

Apricot lay still on the desk with her eyes open.

O’Toole called out softly, a sound like a low B-flat on the French horn:
“Ready?”

“Ready,” she half whispered totally, and closed her eyes.

O’Toole tiptoed across to her, preceded by the bowsprit. “Ape—I mean,
Prue. Little Prue …”

Apricot opened her eyes, which fixed on the looming torpedo. Her eyes
grew even larger, and she made a wide gesture with her arm, sweeping
away the imaginary blanket.

Now, there is a sound that can only be written _ecch_, but which is
pronounced in the back of the throat—like the sound some people make
immediately before they spit, but softer.

Pretend-naked O’Toole looked down on pretend-naked pretend-Prue, his
absolutely no-pretense-about-it erection hanging over her, and made that
strange sound_—ecch.…_

And the bone-stiff, pulsing kidney-wiper collapsed, a good deal faster
than a tire goes flat (but quieter). At the same time O’Toole’s
expressive face acquired an expression of terminal boredom, as he turned
his aristocratic profile aside, his eyes upward and away from the supine
form before him. In a voice suddenly cold, suddenly harsh, he said, “Get
your clothes on. I’ll take you home.”

Apricot rolled up to sit on the edge of the desk, beaming. “How about
that? That’s his trick.”

Michaelmas had not quite finished getting his breath back. “O’Toole,” he
said finally, “how do you do that?”

“I dunno, Mr. Michaelmas. It’s just something I do. Always could.
Hormones or something. I just don’t know,” O’Toole said, putting his
equipment away.

Michaelmas went round the desk for his checkbook and wrote. He tore off
a check and handed it to O’Toole. “That’s what we agreed on?”

“No,” said O’Toole. “It’s twice as much.”

“Worth it,” Michaelmas said.

As O’Toole started away, Apricot said, “Go talk to Sue Benson. I bet
she’s holding her breath waiting for you to go through those doors.”

O’Toole paused. “You want me to—”

“Beat it.” Michaelmas smiled. “That one’s on you.” When O’Toole had
gone, he turned to Apricot, who was swinging her feet, all but purring.
“Ape, did you write that script?”

She nodded. “Mm-hm.”

“Sometimes,” Michaelmas said, “you scare me.”

Later, alone in his office, Michaelmas sent for Square Adam. The young
executive bounded in. His eyes sparkled, he crackled with energy, and
when he walked up and down, which he did almost every time he said
anything, Michaelmas thought he was going to skip. “Well! You’re looking
chipper today.”

“I finished typing in the notes,” Adams said, putting them on the desk.

“Fine. How’re things, Adam?”

“Oh, good. Wonderful. I mean, great!” He moved close and put his hands
on the desk. “Mr. Michaelmas—do you understand women?”

“No.”

“Well, the most unbelievable thing happened last night, Thursday night,
you know. That’s when we … gee, I feel kind of funny talking about
it—it’s kind of private, you know.”

Michaelmas rose from his chair and came around to put a fatherly hand on
the younger man’s shoulder. “You don’t think I’d misuse anything you
told me behind closed doors, do you?” Which is the kind of thing you
learned if you were ever a skinflint. The other guy always thinks you’ve
made a promise.

“Oh, gosh, no!” Adam said. “After we talked the other day and all.” And
he actually blushed. “What happened last night, I was coming to
bed—_her_ bed, you know—and the first thing she did was tell me not to
put out the light. That never happened before. And all of a sudden she
threw back the bedclothes and lay there on the sheet. And she, well, she
didn’t even have her nightgown on! She was half crying and said, ‘Adam,
am I ugly? Am I awful? Do I turn you off?’

“And I said, ‘Prue, this—you—you’re the most beautiful thing I’ve ever
seen.’ And she cried out and put up her arms … and we, well, you know,
and it was just wonderful. And, and … that isn’t all. Afterward she
wouldn’t let me go. Not even to, you know, wash. I stayed in her bed all
night long. I never did that before! And it was wonderful. I really do
not understand women.” He made a little laugh, started out, stopped,
turned. “Mr. Michaelmas?”

“Yes, Adam.”

“Do you suppose I could order some of those, uh, educational movies?”

“All you want, son. And better.” Michaelmas smiled.



GRIZZLY


Sometimes you look at ’em once and you just don’t believe your eyes and
you have to turn your head away and think it over for a split second
before you look again to check out why you are kidding yourself; nobody
can look as beautiful as that, not in real life. And when you look
again, you find out she really does.

I think if you had to find a single word for her, it might be ‘supple,’
but, you see, one word wouldn’t do. The way she carried herself, that
shining hair, that half smile, sort of a ‘come on, it’s all right’ sort
of smile, directed and announced to the whole world. The sun was on her
as she came down the steps of the Women’s Medical Clinic on Balboa
Avenue. I’d been climbing up, but the sight of her stopped me stupid,
standing there goggling with my mouth open. And her smile widened a
little, as if she liked what she saw and she said “Hi.”

I have my own personal cargo of shy, and this isn’t my style at all, but
I heard myself saying, “You want coffee, right?”

“Tea,” she said. You watch someone playing cello, if they bow right up
near the bridge in the middle-low register, it makes a sound like her
voice.

I said a little tiny ‘oh’ and then a real sharp “Oh!” and I could feel
my eyes open so wide they bulged. “Well,” I said, and, “Well, then.”
And, “There’s a place over on mumble mumble.”

“Oh good.”

So there we were in this coffee shop, where she settled into a booth
like thistle-down when the wind dies. Her name, she said, was
Griselda—“Grizzly.” I’d said, wittily, “I can’t bear it,” and then she’d
said, “A lot of people say that, sooner or later,” and coming from
anyone else, that would be puncture, but not the way she did it, so
pleasant. And from the time the coffee (and tea) were ordered until the
time they arrived, I didn’t try to say a word, I just looked. She took
it gracefully, with another kind of smile which said openly, “Go
ahead—it’s all right.” “Graceful”—that’s another one-word description,
but it doesn’t cover the shining teeth peeping out from under their
pink-silk coverlet, not that soft shadowed cave between the fall of her
hair and her neck when she tipped her head to one side. Then she said,
“Do you have herpes?”

I said “h-h-h- …” and then had to stop and swallow. I told myself for a
lot of years that I was unshockable, but guess what. When I got my
breath back I said, “No I don’t, and I don’t have Down syndrome or
neurodermatitis or—or Twonk’s Disease or even AIDS.”

“That’s too bad,” she said—she said regretfully!—and then reached
quickly to touch the back of my hand (it was the first touch between us,
and it raced through my entire endocrine system) and she made a small
laugh. “I don’t really mean herpes; that’s at a standstill right now,
although there might be a real breakthrough soon, what with oral
acyclovir and that detergent cell they’re looking at now. No—AIDS is
what I’m after at the moment. Of course,” she added, and touched my
wrist again, only enough to make my nostrils flare, “I’d want to get it
from someone I liked. What’s Twonk’s Disease?”

I tried to come out of shock into anger—I really tried, but dammit, I
had to look at her while I did that, and I couldn’t look at that face,
that hair, and feel anything but wonder. “You’ve got a funny way,” I
said oafishly, “of being funny.” And then the anger poked its little
head up again. “Is that a cute way of finding out if I’m gay?”

She made a half shake of her head. Impatience. “Don’t fall for that
Moral Majority ploy, that you have to make it with a homosexual Haitian
drug addict to get AIDS. The first researchers found it there, sure, and
it was a godsend to Sister Schlafly, who could then imply that God sent
it to punish the sins of gays for they did with each other, for
snowbirds for what they did to themselves, for Haitians for being black
and for anyone who might be an undocumented alien. Once the doctors got
into some real research, they found out that most anybody can get
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome from anyone who has it. Ask the
doctors at Montefiore Medical if you don’t believe me.”

I’d’ve believed anything she told me, but I was afraid to say so yet. I
hadn’t been ready for that cascade of information and opinion either. I
said, “Why are you so interested in AIDS, anyway?”

“I think I told you. I want to catch it.”

My coffee was getting cold. I wasn’t. “You? _You?_” It came out like a
holy word. “That would be terrible! Just, well, _terrible!_ Why on earth
would you want to do a thing like that?”

“Because I’d make an ideal research subject. And they could research me
for months—years, on that one.”

I felt a great warm rush of something which completely bypassed the
ductless glands. It was admiration. “You are a wonderful, wonderful
person.” I think I had tears in my eyes. “You care that much about other
people, people you don’t even know, that you’d risk your life to help
find a cure.” I wanted to belly across the table and hug her but real
reverence tied me down. “You are a saint.”

“I wish I could pin that medal on,” she said, and took both my hands.
“Just to have you looking at me like that. Nobody ever looked at me like
that before.” Her eyes were extraordinarily bright. We sat that way for
a half minute or a week, I forgot which, and then she took her hands
away, and said: “Do I have to tell you how hard it is to get a job these
days—any job, let alone a good clean one where you know where the next
meal and the next change of linen is coming from? And people around you
who really care?”

“What’s that got to do with it?”

“I know a man who has diffuse interstitial pneumonitis. It’s slowly
turning those little spongy cells and his lungs into fibroid tissue.
Nobody knows what causes it. There’s a team of doctors at UCSD Medical
Center who want to find out. He’s lost thirty-five percent of his lung
capacity already. It will surely kill him.”

“Rough, but what’s that got to do with—”

She went right on, “If it continues at the rate it’s going he’ll be dead
of it in the next forty years.”

“I still don’t see what that’s got to do with—” and then I absorbed what
she just said. “Forty years?—how old is he?”

“Fifty-five. He isn’t scared.”

“Ah, but with thirty-five percent of his lungs gone—”

“A man can have a whole lung taken out and live a long and active life,”
she informed me. “Matter of fact, you can move around pretty well with
eleven-twelfths of your lungs gone, did you know that?”

“I didn’t know that.”

“So they gave him a room at the Center. Meals. Bedding. His own
bathroom. Money—not much, but enough for a man who has all of those
other things paid for, and no taxes. And all he has to do is to go
through lung performance tests once in a while, and hold still for some
pictures.”

“X-rays?”

“Oh my no. Not anymore. When they installed the NMR system from
Schenectady, those electronic wizards fell in love with those lungs of
his. So now there’s a whole ’nother team keeping him for observation.
He’s set for life, or as long as he wants to be there.”

“What’s the—what?—NMR?”

“Nuclear magnetic resonance, but don’t bother your pretty little head
about it,” she said, but oh! so kindly. “It’s a way of taking diagnostic
pictures of living tissues without invading them, watching chemical
reactions, watching fibroid tissue taking over a lung, just for example.
Very new, very fancy, and my friend is very much in demand for
calibrating the thing. Nine times a day, if they want it and no more
X-rays.”

“But that’s like being in the state pen!”

“Oh no! Not one bit! He comes and goes except when he has his dates with
the doctors, and that’s only once in a while.”

“I think you’ve changed the subject, Grizzly.”

“No I haven’t.… Do you know what I really want?” She asked suddenly,
touching my hands again. (Did you ever hear someone play a scale on the
tympanum? That’s what went on in my solar plexus every time she touched
me, only nobody could hear it but me.)

“If it’s something I can give you, or do,” I said, my imagination
getting noisy. “I hope I can.”

“So I,” she said. “A sandwich. And more tea.”

I could do that, and disappointedly, I did. “You’re saying that your
friend has turned his minus into a plus.”

“Oh yes. Plus the skill.”

“What skill?”

“Why he plays that Medical Center like a piano. If he wants some extra
little goodie, a bigger TV or an extra dollar, he mentions it around.
Then a couple of days later he’ll start yearning to go back East or get
a job in San Francisco or some such. It’s never very long before someone
bribes him to stay, with whatever it is he wants. And he always keeps it
reasonable.”

“I’m slowly beginning to understand why you … but Grizzly: AIDS?
Grizzly, half the people who get that, die!”

“I don’t know if it’s half,” she said thoughtfully. “Some say forty
percent, some say eighty. What’s Twonk’s Disease?”

“But you’re so beautiful, Grizzly! And so bright! Surely you could get a
job, a good job, something you’d really like.”

She leaned forward. I could smell her. She used no perfume. She smelled
good. She said soberly, “Bright. I graduated from high school when I was
sixteen. I couldn’t look at colleges since Old Charisma raised tuitions
and lowered the loans. I sold sandwiches at the front end of the Kmart
on 54th Street and saved my pennies to buy a computer course because
everybody said programmers and processors were the crest of a beautiful
wave. As soon as I graduated from that I got my job, bang like that,
just like everybody said.” She took a healthy bite of her
bacon-and-cheese on whole-wheat bun. I’ve never known anyone who could
articulate so freely with half a mouthful of food. The cello was muted
but the music played on. “It was a long room with fifteen word
processors clicking away. It took me about forty minutes to understand
that nobody there would talk more than a grunt or three words, and that
without a boss in sight. Just that chuckety-check from the fifteen
keyboards. Lunchtime was a buzzer, lunch was over after a five-minute
warning honk and another buzzer, quitting time was a honk. And you
better be there. On the second day the manager came out of an upstairs
somewhere and told me I was twelve minutes behind my diary. My diary was
a mainframe console in his office. He could key in any one of the
fifteen processors and his computer would display work performed versus
work assigned. Which is why nobody ever leaned back even for a minute to
say something to somebody. I stayed in that sweatshop until I had earned
my unemployment and got myself immediately fired.”

She drank tea. “I did all the right things, wrote resumes, made the
rounds, stood in lines, waited in personnel departments. There were
jobs. Making submarine sandwiches in the front end of chain stores.
Sweatshops. Door-to-door sales. (That’s rapesville.) I said no either to
the job or to the gropes that came with them or both.”

“In between times I did what I really liked, the libraries, museums,
parks, the San Diego zoo. I met the fibrosis case at the zoo. He bought
me a sack of animal food and we got to talking, and that’s how I found
out about how he made his living. He’s a nice man.

“I thought about it a lot. One thing I thought about was syphilis, but
that’s only good for two or three days and once next week. I thought
about unwed mothering. You can get taken in and cared for, living with
thirteen-year-old incest veterans, runaways and hookers, for clothes, a
bed, make-work and a little money, but it’s only good for eight months
maximum and then you have some difficult decisions to make and repeats
of all that did not inspire me.

“But it was Mr. Fibrosis that tipped me off to the medical underground.
There is a whole army of patient, skilled research subjects well-fed and
happy all over this town. There’s a man living very comfortably in the
clinic of the La Jolla Medical Clinic on Genesee Avenue with incurable
ulcers on his leg. They’ll be incurable as long as his girlfriend keeps
inoculating the ulcers when they begin to heal. She’s from the West
Indies and has what they call down there an ‘oldsore.’ The fact that
he’s the only Caucasian ever known to have a genuine oldsore makes him
eligible. Okay: he’s a fake and Mr. Fibrosis is not, but if the fake, or
any other fake makes the medics come up with a cure for oldsores or
anything else, he might just end a lot of misery somewhere in the world.
So he might as well live easy while he does it.

“You can’t just walk into a hospital or research center and get a spot
like that without knowing what you’re doing. Research and medical
scientists aren’t stupid, and they have some humongous tools to work
with. You have to read everything you can reach, up and down the whole
field of what they call ‘the healing arts.’ ” She paused to pour hot
water thoughtfully on her tea bag. “You have to use your imagination and
a lot of tact. Finding something obscure isn’t enough; some old codger
who used to be a country doctor is likely to swab your trouble with
boric acid and cure it on the spot. Or some pink-cheeked kid who got his
MD last June might connect you to a black box you’ve never heard of, and
it lights up and shows you up for a fake, if you are one. It has to be
something interesting and challenging, and maybe threatening if it gets
out of hand, like herpes or AIDS; and most of all, they must never
suspect that you want something from them; they have to want something
from you. And you can’t just agree; you have to be persuaded. Are you
married or anything?”

I came to with a start, my mind swirling with oldsores and research, the
wonder of her soft yet muscular lips and shy swift tongue as she spoke.
“Not even anything.”

“There’s lots of them in the mental hospitals. It’s easy enough to make
that scene; all you have to do is go there and sign yourself in. But
you’d better know what you’re doing. Some places are not snake pits at
all, but to walk that fine wire of being an outpatient inpatient, you
better have something interesting or you’ll have a thin part of a funnel
in your face with the drug factory at the other end. Mr. Fibrosis told
me of a man who was a genius with mental hospitals. He would walk in and
start talking to the admitting doctor in a quiet cultivated voice,
talking absolute logic. Mr. Fibrosis says if you anchor one end of a
logical chain in truth, and break no links, you can put the other end
anywhere you want. He persuaded one of the doctors to believe that since
some chemicals used in injections were derived from the organs of pigs,
he ran a real risk of turning into a pig if he was injected. He was so
persuasive that he got a room of his own, not locked or padded, for
seven months. Then he moved on to another hospital away from San Diego
but still in the Sunbelt. What is Twonk’s Disease?”

That brought me back to earlier words. “Not AIDS. Please, Grizzly; not
that, not you.”

“You have something better?”

“But that’s so … so …”

“Darling—” (My God; did she call me that?) “Don’t worry. The big danger
of AIDS is not AIDS. All AIDS does is depress the immune system so that
something else can get in and take over—viruses, bacteria, fungi, yeast,
and you die of the flu or meningitis or something stupid like mono. But
you see, darling—(again!)—if I’m a research subject with AIDS, in a
really good hospital like Scripps, there just won’t be anything else
getting in and taking over. They’ll take care of that, right down to
filtered air and forks and spoons taken out of an autoclave with
surgical gloves. I’ll be all right.”

I shook my head very slowly and said “Balboa Park. Black’s Beach. The
libraries. And Grizzly; the Zoo. Are you going to sit there in a sterile
bubble away from anyone who coughs, or sneezes or—” my tone dropped to
that which Thorne Smith described as “a voice as low as his intentions.”
“—puts his arms around you, Grizzly, holds you close …?”

“Are … are you crying?”

“Of course not,” I said hoarsely, swabbing my eyes with my napkin. For
the first time, I couldn’t look at her. When at last I did, she was
looking at me out of a face full of tenderness. Her head was tipped a
little in that way of hers, and I had the mad urge to plunge my whole
self into that cave of warm flesh and sheltering hair, in and in and
altogether in.

“There was another reason I stopped on the Women’s Clinic steps when you
spoke to me,” she said softly.

Oh Lord.

She said, “I was coming out. You were going in. Why were you going into
the Clinic?”

“Oh, I was just—I mean, I—” I stalled.

She laughed suddenly, wind-chimes. “You’re _blushing!_”

“No I’m not,” I said out of a hot face.

“Why? Tell me.”

“Twonk’s Disease.”

“Come on …”

“All right,” I said gravely, “I’ve got a wart on my stomach.” I got up.
“Will you come home with me?” She didn’t say anything. She came home
with me.

It was maybe three weeks later when I was reading _Not the Reader_
sitting alone in the kitchen over my coffee, when Grizzly came in,
dancing and shouting, “We did it! We did it!”

“Damn, you’ve been away a long time!”

“Listen to me! We—”

“Where did you go? Oh, right … But what about the rash, your poor dear
rash?”

“That’s it, that’s _it!_” She danced in a circle and suddenly rushed me,
pulling my head down and between her breasts, and holding it there. She
is very strong. I couldn’t say a word.

“Now that I have your attention,” she said quietly out of a deep pool of
laughter, “you will be pleased to know that a dermatologist, an
allergist, a biochemist and two graduate students earnestly request our
presence at Vista Hill Hospital, where they have prepared a three-room
suite, in which, for a suitable fee, we are asked to reside, sometimes
apart, often together, for research purposes, for an indefinite period.”

“Because of the rash?” I muffled.

She released me. “Because of the rash.”

“What is it? Twonk’s Disease?”

“No it isn’t. And they’re fascinated. There are only a few such cases in
the records, and none of them has ever seen one before, and they want to
know _everything_ about it, no matter how long it takes!”

“What is it, then?”

“Darling—_I’m allergic to you!_”

“Grizzly—that’s awful!”

“No it isn’t. I don’t mind a rash. And they’ll cure it and induce it and
cure it and induce it, until they’ve analyzed it down to the atom. What
_is_ Twonk’s Disease?”

It’s a mild old gag I carry around to use to break up dull
conversations, or to wreck other people’s train of thought when I need
time of my own. I put on my grave face and said, “Very serious. It’s a
falling of the armpits.” And we both shouted and danced.



AFTERWORD



THEODORE STURGEON, STORYTELLER


Paul Williams


I

The best short story writer in America lives on a hill on the outskirts
of Los Angeles. He works on TV scripts, gives lectures, teaches a class,
writes book reviews and does introductions to other people’s books.
That’s all. He’s sold four new short stories in the last four years. Of
the twenty-three books he’s written in the course of his career, only
three are still in print in the United States. His old masterpieces are
not being read; and his new ones are not being written.

And he has no one to blame for this state of affairs but himself.

Theodore Sturgeon.

I’m twenty-eight years old (or will be when this is published) and the
man I’m writing about is more than twice my age. And when I was just
half this age, fourteen, it occurs to me now, I was at a party on the
fourteenth floor of the Pick-Congress Hotel in Chicago at about five in
the morning, the last night of my first science-fiction convention, and
Judith Merril, famed anthologist and author/editor of some of my
favorite books, turned to me and asked—just about everyone but me had
consumed a fair quantity of alcohol by this time—“Doesn’t it bother you
to see that your heroes have feet of clay?” And I said, “They couldn’t
be heroes if they didn’t,” or some such clever fourteen-year-old’s
remark. Then the sun came up over Lake Michigan while the drunk science
fiction writers told stories and sang folk songs, and I was indeed
filled with quiet awe—not at the great names made flesh around me, but
at whatever miracles had brought me, at age fourteen, to this inner
sanctum, this place of dreams.

Theodore Sturgeon was Guest of Honor at that particular science-fiction
convention (Labor Day Weekend, 1962), and I shook his hand but didn’t
actually talk with him. He had his wife and his children with him, and
was very much the center of attention wherever he went in the convention
hall, and anyway I had nothing to say; I loved the man and I loved his
stories and there was no way I could tell him that.

Fourteen years later I visit his home, we talk about anything and
everything, I enjoy his hospitality and see his feet of clay—we’ve been
friends of a sort for two or three years now—and each time I read a
story of his he is again my favorite writer, a worker of miracles; but
in between times he’s just a friend, attractive and annoying and as
blind as the rest of us.… To write this story I need a hero, because
this is a story of great achievements. But even after months of careful
research, the man slips away from me, he’s too human—I know him and his
life so well but I still can’t understand where his miracles come from.

Sturgeon wrote, just to give you an example, the all-time great story
about Senator Joseph McCarthy, who he was and how he did what he did.
The story is called “Mr. Costello, Hero,” and it starts out on a
spaceship. This man Costello is a passenger on the ship—wonderful guy,
everybody likes him. Except maybe the skipper, an uptight old coot who
doesn’t approve of the progressive influence Mr. Costello has had on his
crew. Like they’ve started playing draw poker without the draw, because
that way there’s less opportunity for anyone to cheat. And volunteers
stand watch in the galley, to make sure the cook isn’t poisoning the
food. True, it makes for a crowded kitchen, but Cooky doesn’t mind—this
way he knows everybody can trust him.

Costello gets off at a city on a frontier planet and manages to drive a
wedge between the city-dwellers and the trappers who provide the fur
that is the planet’s chief export, by making people deathly afraid of
anyone who likes to be alone. Pretty soon he’s running the place. It’s
utterly terrifying and utterly believable, particularly because Sturgeon
tells the story from the viewpoint of a guy (the ship’s purser) who
really likes Mr. Costello and doesn’t see anything wrong in the way he
does things.

It’s a triumph of skilled storytelling—great characters, absorbing
narrative, hair-raising conclusion. But there’s more to it than that.
The story was written and published in 1953, at the height of the
McCarthy era, and it is a devastating, thinly disguised attack on the
man and his methods … but more than that, it’s a beautifully lucid
presentation of exactly how a man like McCarthy can use fear and vanity
and gullibility to divide people and set them against each other and put
himself in power.

“Mr. Costello, Hero” is one of the finer pieces of writing to come out
of the whole McCarthy experience, and it was written for a
science-fiction magazine by a genre writer who had listened to the
Army-McCarthy hearings on the radio and had once in his youth written
speeches for a local politician in a Texas seaport, and that was the
extent of his involvement in the world of politics.

How does Sturgeon do it? No two stories of his are alike, but of the 160
he’s written in the last four decades, I count at least fifty major
works, stories as beautiful and important as anything you might care to
compare them with. And none of these stories is known to anyone but
science fiction readers and Sturgeon fanatics; and forty-five of the
fifty are not even in print in this country.

And Sturgeon sits in his house in Los Angeles, full of ideas, and stares
at his typewriter, and doesn’t write.


II

Theodore Sturgeon was born February 26th, 1918, on Staten Island in New
York City. His name at birth was Edward Hamilton Waldo. “I was born a
Waldo,” Sturgeon told science fiction scholar David Hartwell in an
unpublished 1972 interview, “and had kind of an interesting family.
Peter Waldo was a dissident priest in the 12th century who got ahold of
the dumb idea that perhaps the Pope at Rome ought to go back to the vows
of poverty and obedience, get rid of the Swiss Guards and the
jewel-encrusted cross, and put on a monk’s habit and go out amongst the
people. The Pope took a very dim view of that indeed, and they
persecuted the Waldenses all across Europe for 200 years.”

“That was the Waldensian Heresy, that you should go back to Apostolic
Christianity. Nobody wanted to go and do a thing like that. And they
settled in Flanders, and in England, and in 1640 two ships of them
decided to go to the New World. They got separated by a storm, and one
of them went to Connecticut; there are still Waldos in Connecticut to
this day. The other ship went far south, and it wound up in, of all
places, Haiti. Well, Haiti in 1640 was already a refuge for runaway
slaves; and when they found they had a shipload of dissident priests,
they welcomed them with open arms. Waldo became corrupted to Vaudois,
which became Voodoo, which is the etymology of the word ‘voodoo’….
There’s been a whole line of gurus in my family: Ralph Waldo Emerson was
one of them.”

Edward Waldo’s father, who was in the paint, oil and varnish business,
left his mother when Edward was five. Five years later she remarried,
and Edward (along with his older brother Peter) was adopted by his
stepfather and his name was legally changed to Theodore Sturgeon.
Sturgeon because that was the stepfather’s name—he was a professor of
modern languages at Drexel Institute in Philadelphia—and Theodore
because Edward was the boy’s father’s name and the mother was still
bitter and anyway young Edward had always been known as Teddy. (To this
day, libraries all over the world list “Theodore Sturgeon” as a
pseudonym for “E. H. Waldo,” which is incorrect; Sturgeon is his real
name.)

At the age of thirteen, Theodore became a star athlete. He’d had to do
something. His stepfather had arranged for him to enter high school at
the age of 11—he went from the fifth grade to the ninth grade with
nothing in between but eight weeks of summer school—and naturally he was
the smallest kid in the class. “I was pretty well brutalized by the
whole thing. I had to figure out different ways to walk to school every
day, because kids would lay for me on the way. I had curly golden hair
and was very thin and kind of wheyfaced and—pretty. And I was just an
absolute target.”

“While I was in high school I discovered apparatus gymnastics, and that
became my total preoccupation. In a year and a half I gained four inches
and sixty pounds, and I became captain and manager of my gym team, which
is literally a transfiguration. I was totally born again. The very kids
that used to bully me would follow me around and carry my books. And
then when I was fifteen, I came down with acute rheumatic fever.”

“By this time I had a two-year scholarship already at Temple University,
an athletic scholarship; and my whole life was blueprinted. I was going
to get my degree in physical education and spend a year teaching, and
then I was going down to Florida and join the Barnum & Bailey Circus and
become a flyer. However, acute rheumatic fever and six months flat on my
back took care of that. My heart was so enlarged, it squirted up between
my ribs where you could see it beating from outside. Inside of a year I
had a fantastic recovery—but no more gymnastics, ever. It was a
shattering experience.”

Sturgeon left high school a few weeks before graduating. He went to sea
for three years. And then he became a writer.


III

Sturgeon’s best-known work is a novel (actually three interconnected
stories) called _More than Human_. It’s about five children with unusual
psychic powers who are able to “blesh” their talents together so that
they become a single functioning organism, _homo gestalt_, the next step
in human evolution. This novel contains some of the most memorable
characters and extraordinary passages of writing (“The idiot lived in a
black and gray world, punctuated by the white lightning of hunger and
the flickering of fear. His clothes were old and many-windowed. Here
peeped a shinbone, sharp as a cold chisel, and there in the torn coat
were ribs like the fingers of a fist. He was tall and flat. His eyes
were calm and his face was dead.”) in modern fiction. It won the
International Fantasy Award in 1954, has sold over a half-million copies
in paperback, and both directly and indirectly has had a huge impact on
the ideas and values of several generations of young Americans.

When a friend of mine, in 1964, asked David Crosby about the new rock
group he was performing in, he said, “We blesh.” Crosby, like most
mid-Sixties’ rock musicians (and underground press editors, political
activists, dope impresarios, etc.), was an avid reader of science
fiction in general and Sturgeon in particular; and he realized early
that the Byrds and other rock groups were living examples of Sturgeon’s
idea that a group of humans could function as more than the sum of the
individuals involved … not just more, but mystically more, so that the
group took on its own personality and created things that none of its
individual members could even have imagined. Chester Anderson wrote in
the San Francisco _Oracle_ in 1966, in a widely reprinted analysis of
the new rock or “head” music, “Rock is evolving Sturgeonesque homo
gestalt configurations.…” The Merry Pranksters were another example of
the same phenomenon, as were all the nameless groups that came together
to organize political or cultural events and then disbanded and vanished
when the work was done.

The “counterculture,” in retrospect, was heavily modeled on a handful of
science-fiction and fantasy novels: _Childhood’s End, Dune, The Lord of
the Rings, Stranger in a Strange Land_ and _More than Human_. The ideas
expressed in these books hit home for a lot of impressionable
adolescents, who later tried hard to transform their yearnings into
changed lifestyles and new realities.

And a new set of values. Sturgeon, in _More than Human_ and throughout
his work, is a moralist as well as a visionary. Not the kind of moralist
who knows what’s right and what’s wrong and tells you in so many words,
but the kind who is searching for the answers and shares his search with
his readers. In _More than Human_, the problem faced by _homo gestalt_
is, “Now that you’re superman, what do you do with your powers?”
Sturgeon’s answer is awkward and incomplete, but, for our generation,
much more appropriate than Nietzsche’s.

We have to live our lives, he says, constantly refining and acting out a
definition of morality that goes beyond individual survival and even
goes beyond survival of the social unit. He is reaching constantly for a
higher sense of the human role on this planet, and in that he is very
much in touch with his postwar readers.

Sturgeon has an ambivalent attitude towards his own work, his career,
all that sort of thing. He wants success desperately, and avoids it like
the plague. Late one night, puttering around the kitchen (it was
probably 3 AM, and he was probably getting ready to feed the rabbits or
wash the dishes), Ted told me he’s been hearing this voice inside him
all his life which says, in response to whatever is or seems to be
expected of him by the outside world, “I won’t do it.” Only recently, he
said, he’s realized that there’s another half to the sentence, and what
he’s really saying, deep in there somewhere, is, “I won’t do what they
want me to do.”

And, God knows, he doesn’t.

Sturgeon does not do what the world expects him to do. He resists
mightily. He always has. When he was in high school there was a
regulation that, when the weather got warm, if you came to school
wearing a sweater you had to take it off. So Ted would show up at school
wearing a sweater but no shirt.

“He has this need to do it backwards.…” Betty Ballantine, Sturgeon’s
editor on a number of his best books, was talking about Sturgeon’s
approach to a novel or short story (like when he wrote a western in
which the hero loses the girl, or portraying Mr. Costello via an
admiring observer); but as soon as the words were out of her mouth we
both realized it was a perfect description of Sturgeon’s approach to
everything in his life.

In his own funny way, Theodore Sturgeon is one of the contrariest people
I’ve ever met. This makes him hard to work with and helps keep him away
from success. But it’s also a significant part of what makes his stories
so special. Sturgeon consistently sees things as though he were looking
from the other side.

He turns things around and inside out at the same time, without letting
go of your hand. It’s a neat trick if you can do it.


IV

Q: How did you get started as a writer?

A: “I was in the merchant marine, working on a coastwise tanker, and I
worked out a way to rob the American Express Company of several hundred
thousand dollars. I did my homework: I wrote to the company and found
out precisely how they shipped this and that and the other thing, got it
all worked out and then wrote it as a short story because I didn’t have
quite the guts to do it myself.

“And one magical day, when I was picking up my mail at the Seaman’s
Institute in New York, I got a letter that said I’d sold the story. I’d
sold it to a newspaper syndicate, the McClure Syndicate, and I was so
excited I quit my job, I went ashore and I was going to be a writer.

“Well, I sold the story for five dollars, payable on publication. It had
taken me three months to research it. And they were willing to buy one
story, sometimes two, a week. No more. So for almost six months, I lived
on five or ten dollars week. I lived on West 63rd Street, where Lincoln
Center is now, and it cost me seven and a half dollars a week for the
room; and I ate on whatever was left.”

So in 1938, at the age of 20, Theodore Sturgeon quit the merchant marine
and became a full-time writer. He’d been at sea for three years,
starting with six months on a school ship, the Penn State Nautical
School, which was just like going back to the ninth grade and getting
brutalized (new cadets were hazed mercilessly by upper-classmen) all
over again. “I remember the first shit session I was in. One of the
officers came up from aft, and started to walk forward, and walked right
past this line. And I greeted him with—silently, of course, but I
thought, ‘Oh thank God! Here comes an officer. This is going to stop.’
And I could not believe it when he walked right through without looking.
We were getting brutalized and beat on and kids were passing out, it was
just ghastly. And the guy did nothing to stop it; he smiled slightly and
walked on. That was so bloody unfair—” Ted says this like it was
yesterday; after forty years, you can still hear the anger in his voice.

“I could not bring myself to quit while this was going on. But the very
minute I completed my first term, and was no longer on the bottom …” He
dropped out of nautical school, just like he’d dropped out of high
school, and used his cadet credentials to get an Ordinary Seaman’s
Ticket, and shipped out with a steamer outfit called the Merchant and
Miners Transportation Company.

The short stories Sturgeon wrote for the newspaper syndicate, in his
room on West 63rd Street, were not science fiction—they were
human-interest vignettes, boy-meets-girl or sailing stories or whatever,
but always with some kind of little clever twist that gave them their
charm. Like the girl gets the guy by putting vanilla extract on her ear
lobes, so every time he gets near her he thinks about cookies and yellow
curtains in the kitchen.

Sturgeon wrote these stories, and other odd assignments when he could
get them, and then one day when he’d walked over to Brooklyn to see his
brother, or maybe late one night nursing a five-cent cup of coffee in
Martin’s 57th Street Cafeteria, somebody showed him a copy of a new
fantasy magazine called _Unknown_, and said, “Hey! This is what you
ought to be writing for.…” Sturgeon went to see John Campbell, the
editor, who also edited a magazine called _Astounding Science Fiction_
and ended up selling him twenty-six stories in the next year and a half.
It was 1939.

Science fiction was not a new discovery for Sturgeon. Like most of us,
he started reading the stuff when he was twelve or thirteen. His
stepfather—always the autocrat—took one look at Ted’s copies of
_Amazing_ and _Astounding_ and forbade him to bring those pulp magazines
into the house. The Sturgeon family lived in a fourth-floor apartment,
top of the building, and the closet in Ted’s room had a hatch that led
to a crawlspace under the roof. Ted took his magazines up there and
dropped them behind the fourth rafter back, where they couldn’t be seen
even by somebody standing on a chair looking in with a flashlight. “So
it’s a mystery to me how that man was ever able to discover them.…”

But he did. “One time I came home, and he says, ‘There’s a mess in your
room. I want you to clean it up.’ I walked in there, and that room was
nearly ankle deep in tiny little pieces of paper no bigger than postage
stamps. He had torn up my entire collection of science-fiction
magazines. It must have taken him hours—I guess his hands must have
ached for days. I can remember I was sobbing, just crying, sweeping up
those little pieces of paper, and looking at one every once in a while,
wondering what story that was. And I had to clean it all up. Which may
well be why I’m a science fiction writer today.”

Ted’s brother went off to fight in the Spanish Civil War, and Ted stayed
in New York, writing his stories. He married his high school
sweetheart—her name was Dorothy, and she changed it to Dorothe so it
would be the same as Theodore—and they had a baby girl, Patricia, and
then Ted—who’d written his best-received story to date, a tale of
eldritch horror called “It,” in ten hours on his honeymoon, and then
followed it with a little epic called “Microcosmic God,” which made such
an impact that decades later it was voted one of the top five sf stories
of all time by the Science Fiction Writers of America—Ted turned his
back on his growing reputation as a writer and got a job managing a
hotel in Jamaica.

Sturgeon was twenty-two years old. He’d thought he could turn out
stories fast enough—at a penny a word—to support his new family, but it
wasn’t working out; in fact lately the stories had stopped coming
altogether. This hotel gig would take care of immediate needs, and then
maybe the change of scene would get his creative juices flowing again.…

It didn’t work out that way. In the next five years, Sturgeon wrote
exactly one story, right in the middle of this period; the rest of the
time, though he tried and tried, nothing happened. The war came, the
hotel closed down—Sturgeon became a bulldozer driver, a heavy equipment
operator (he was not a big man, but he was good with machines, and it
was wartime)—they moved to Puerto Rico, and then St. Croix. A second
daughter, Cynthia, was born. Eventually Ted quit his other jobs and just
worked full time at trying to write—but apart from his classic short
novel “Killdozer,” written in nine days in 1943, no stories came. He
just didn’t understand it. It was like something had broken inside him,
and he couldn’t put it together again.


V

“No living writer has quite Sturgeon’s grasp on horror and hilarity, nor
knows quite so many kinds of people so well.”—Groff Conklin

“Perhaps the best way I can tell you what I think of a Theodore Sturgeon
story is to explain with what diligent interest, in the year 1940, I
split every Sturgeon tale down the middle and fetched out its innards to
see what made it function. I looked upon Sturgeon with a secret and
gnawing jealousy.”—Ray Bradbury

“Theodore Sturgeon has made himself the finest conscious artist science
fiction ever had.”—James Blish

“I think the corpus of Sturgeon’s stories ranks with de Maupassant’s. I
think it is superior to O. Henry’s, superior to Damon Runyon’s, superior
to Ring Lardner’s, you know, the great short-story writers of … I think
it is superior to Hemingway’s short stories (if you take the Hemingway
novels, you may be into something else). I think one is dealing with a
writer of that stature. To the extent that the short story is an art,
Sturgeon is the American short story writer. The fact that he happens to
be writing in science fiction is a glorious accident.”—Samuel R. Delany

In pursuit of a hero.

It was his daughter Tandy—the fourth of Ted’s seven children—who gave me
the word for what kind of a hero Theodore Sturgeon is. She said she’s
had this vision, since she was a small child, of “a society that
works”—maybe a small village—not a conscious model, but something she’s
picked up from dreams, or by osmosis. “A place I know as the society
that should be. And the storyteller is central to that society.
He—Homer—is the cement that holds society together. They need to go and
listen to him. Now people don’t ask. They’ve forgotten, they don’t have
time to listen. But they still need it. And they like him because he
makes them want to listen.”

Storyteller. That’s the word.

Tandy’s vision reminds me of a Sturgeon story called “The Touch of Your
Hand.” It takes place in a small village, and there’s a wise old man who
the people go and listen to—but he’s a musician—but the story’s about an
angry young man, who wants to take these sleepy villagers and teach them
to struggle and hate, so that they can build cities and glorious
machines and become real men … and about a beautiful young woman, who
doesn’t understand, but who loves him and tries to help. Like most
Sturgeon stories, it has powerful characters and some very surprising
twists in the plot line. And the story, which manages to show at the
same time much of what is ugliest and most beautiful about human beings,
is also memorable for introducing one of Sturgeon’s most original and
challenging ideas on the subject of how to improve human nature.

The same idea in a somewhat different form crops up in a later story,
“The Skills of Xanadu.” (“Touch” is from 1953; “Xanadu” from 1956.) In
both instances Sturgeon suggests that human beings, or creatures like
them, will develop a form of telepathy within a social group (a village,
a nation) which allows each person to automatically draw on the group’s
collective reservoir of knowledge and acquired skills whenever he or she
needs to know something. In other words, if you need to sew a buttonhole
and you don’t know how, you just concentrate and the way to do it will
come to you from someone who does know will come to your fingers, and
you can just start to do it and feel how it should be and which motions
are right.

“We are telepathic, not in the way of conveying details, but in the much
more useful way of conveying a manner of thinking.” (“The Touch of Your
Hand.”) “He knew without question that he had the skills of this people,
and that he could call on any of those skills just by concentrating an a
task until it came to him how the right way (for him) would feel. He
knew without surprise that these resources transcended even death; for a
man could have a skill and then it was everyman’s, and if the man should
die, his skill still lived in everyman.” (“The Skills of Xanadu.”)

Above and to the left of the sink in Sturgeon’s kitchen is one of those
crowded bulletin boards where odd items accumulate and stay in place for
years. My eye was caught one night by a postcard bearing a line from
Karl F. Gauss (German mathematician, 1777–1855), and I mentioned it, and
Ted said it was one of his favorites, and from that time forward the
quote has become a kind of touchstone in our conversations, we’ll just
naturally arrive at it in the course of what we’re saying, look at each
other, mumble some obeisance to “that line from Gauss,” and move on from
there. We can almost hear the theme music in the background.…

The quote reads: “I have had my solutions for a long time; but I do not
yet know how I am to arrive at them.”

If you look at this long enough, it will tell you: how Sturgeon writes a
story. How he lives. And the way in which a Sturgeon story affects the
person who reads it.

Sturgeon’s vision of a limited telepathic linkage that allows each
person’s skills to become everyman’s is at least as important an idea as
the notion of going to the moon, which originated in science fiction
(thousands of years ago) and has been repeated over the years until
somebody finally went ahead and acted it out. It is the idea, not the
technology, that is the force behind human progress. As Frederik Pohl
explained it in his brilliant story “The Gold at the Starbow’s End”:
“Most problems have grammatical solutions. The problem of transporting
people from the Earth to any other planet does not get solved by putting
pieces of steel together one at a time at random, and happening to find
out you’ve built a spaceship by accident. It gets solved by constructing
a model which describes the necessary circumstances under which the
transportation occurs. Once you have the grammatical model, you just put
the metal around it and it goes like gangbusters.”

All of Sturgeon’s stories are models: problems and solutions. He is a
(very sympathetic) student of the human situation—what makes people
tick? But to say that he has his solutions before he starts is not to
say he knows the end of the story before he starts writing. The solution
is the beginning of the story, it is the implicit harmony of the
situation, the way things ought to be. As soon as we meet the people,
the characters, we feel it. This harmony is violated by the problem(s)
facing the characters—which is the dramatic element, the tension: if
there were no problem, there would be no story, just a portrait. But
there is a problem; and the end of the story, the climax of the plot, is
not the solution (that’s implicit, a restoration of order) but the
how-to-arrive-at-it. At the end we discover how the solution is arrived
at. And that’s the part that Sturgeon (like Gauss) doesn’t know until he
gets there.

The secret I am trying to tell here is the art of storytelling, at its
highest—how it’s done. It’s like Houdini getting himself locked in a
trunk and thrown in the ocean. I don’t think he knows beforehand how
he’s going to get out of that trunk. Rather, he’s putting himself in a
situation where he will be forced to focus every bit of his own strength
and concentration on the problem at hand—and he knows that under those
circumstances, and only those circumstances, he has the capability to
find a way out. It’s an act of faith.

The solution is: open the trunk. That’s obvious. And the way to arrive
at the solution is to lock yourself in the trunk. That’s not obvious at
all. But it’s beautiful.


VI

Sturgeon came back from the islands and turned into a zombie. Originally
he’d flown to New York for a ten-day visit, to get a new agent. “I went
into some kind of a funk at the time, it must have been a severe
depression.” He found an agent, but he still hadn’t done any writing,
and he couldn’t get together the money or the energy to fly back to St.
Croix. So he stayed in Manhattan, sleeping eighteen to twenty hours a
day.

Ten days became eight months, and finally Dorothe, who was still down in
the islands with two kids and no money, decided she’d had enough, and
asked for a divorce. Ted flew down to try to patch things up, but it was
too late. His marriage was kaput. Another failure.

The atom bomb exploded in Hiroshima.

Sturgeon had moved in with a friend of John Campbell’s named L. Jerome
Stanton. “Stanton had an apartment on Eighth Avenue with no furniture in
it, and I had a whole warehouse full of furniture, so I moved my
furniture into his place and just did anything he suggested … you know,
take the stuff out to the laundry or do the shopping or cook the dinner
or something, until it was done, and then I just stopped, like a switch
had been thrown, until he said to do something else. I was really in a
zombie-ish condition.…”

He got a job as copy chief in the advertising section of a wartime firm
that made quartz crystals; that ended when he flew back to try to talk
things through with Dorothe, and when he came back to New York he was
more depressed than ever. He wrote to another high school girlfriend,
Ree Dragonette, and eventually she came to live with him; meanwhile he
was having lunch every day with John Campbell, editor of _Astounding_
(_Unknown_ had folded due to the wartime paper shortage), and spending
time in the basement of John’s house in New Jersey. It was in that
basement, at the end of 1945, after a dry spell of more than five years,
that Sturgeon finally started writing again.

At first the new stories were almost 100% dialogue, as if Sturgeon were
not yet ready to hear the sound of his own voice on paper. The third
story—“Mewhu’s Jet,” about a visitor from outer space who turns out to
be a little kid on a joy ride—was mostly dialogue, but the characters
were stronger, the humor brighter, the human qualities of the situation
more fully developed. Sturgeon’s storytelling skill was starting to
reemerge.

And then came the breakthrough: a story called “Maturity,” a tense,
warm, brilliant, utterly moving account of an irresistible,
irresponsible young genius (songwriter/sculptor/poet/ne’er-do-well) who
undergoes a series of glandular treatments intended to make him grow up,
biochemically speaking. It’s a love story—the old eternal
triangle—something of a detective story—a fabulous portrait of a
fabulous human being who is not entirely unlike the author’s idealized
view of himself—and more, much more than that, a tale that transcends
category to confront one of the central human riddles of any era: who am
I? What is maturity?

And, like most of Sturgeon’s best stories, and unlike most of the rest
of postwar literature, it is heavy on plot: a real story is unfolded,
the kind that sucks you in and glues your mind to the page, and all the
other good stuff the storyteller offers is thrown in as a bonus and
never allowed to get in the way of the story itself. Indeed, the bonus
material—ideas, insights, detailed descriptions (the hero of “Maturity”
compares his surprised doctor/lady-friend to a taffy-pulling machine,
and launches into a tour-de-force description of how said machine
operates and why it’s so beautiful), charm—is all integral to and
indistinguishable from the telling of the story; Sturgeon indulges
himself constantly, wonderfully, and yet never wastes a word.

“Maturity” was followed by a succession of fine stories—notably “Thunder
and Roses” (a sad, poetic yarn in which the United States is destroyed
by atomic bombs but refuses to retaliate), “It Wasn’t Syzygy” (a love
story, written in magnificent metered prose, in which the horrified
narrator discovers he’s a figment of his girlfriend’s imagination) and
“The Perfect Host” (a tale of possession, built around a unique and
powerful idea and told in a manner that breaks all the rules of
storytelling—successfully). Each story was different, was brilliant in a
whole new startling way. No one could guess what the man would do next.

Sturgeon became a superstar.

Now, in terms of the money to be made and the size of the audience,
being a star in the science fiction world in the late ’40s was a little
like being a big frog in a rather small glass of water. But it was a
respectable glass of water, from the point of view of the people inside
it (outsiders, of course, considered science fiction worthless trash).
Science-fiction people felt like they knew something everybody else
didn’t know.…

Sturgeon had dreams of glory. He would complain about being stuck in the
science-fiction ghetto, but he never made any real effort to break out.
For one thing, it was very comfortable there in the ghetto—he could
write whatever he wanted to and be almost certain of selling it; editors
knew him and would give him advances, his stories were read and praised
by his peers, including all the writers he himself admired and
respected … and there was a freedom in the science-fiction field that
did not and does not exist elsewhere, an openness to new ideas, unusual
or shocking subject matter, innovative language or story structure.
Sturgeon may have known intuitively that he would never enjoy such
freedom in any other paying market.

But there was something else, too. Sturgeon had a great desire for
success. Like any kid who’s taken a career his parents don’t approve of,
he wanted _to show them …_ but he was blocked, there was something very
strong inside him that told him he didn’t deserve success, he didn’t
deserve his talent or the love of his friends or anything else good that
seemed to come his way.

And he couldn’t overcome this. He has not overcome it to this day. He
still doesn’t feel secure even about his own status within the
science-fiction field! He reads the reviews, he hears the accolades, but
he forgets them immediately. He lives in a world of his own, a world
where he nurtures his own enormous self-doubt for his own impenetrable
reasons.

“I’m not a writer,” he told Judith Merril in 1947. “A writer is someone
who has to write. The only reason I write is because it’s the only way I
can justify all the other things I didn’t do.”

Robert Heinlein, who started writing science fiction at the same time
Sturgeon did, came back from the war and started selling stories to _The
Saturday Evening Post_ (the number-one market for fiction at the time)
and then wangled a contract with a major book publisher to do science
fiction novels aimed at teenagers. Sturgeon had the same opportunity to
break into the big time—in fact, in March of 1947, he won a $1,000
short-story contest (Graham Greene took second place) sponsored by the
British magazine _Argosy_, with a story called “Bianca’s Hands.” He
exulted in this success, but made no serious attempt to use it as a
steppingstone to broader commercial or literary acceptance. Indeed, he
only submitted “Bianca’s Hands”—a story he’d written before the war and
had never been able to sell; one editor told him he’d never buy any
story from a person who could write such a monstrous thing—to _Argosy_
because it had been rejected by every other possible market. He’d have
gladly given it to anyone for a quick $50; and indeed there were many
stories he sold for $50 or $100 that could have gone to much better
markets, but were never sent around because Ted needed the money right
away and couldn’t afford to wait or take a chance on rejection.

So, in 1948, when he needed more money than the science-fiction world
could offer him, he went to work for Time, Inc., writing direct-mail
copy for _Fortune_ magazine. He was very good at it. (“Direct mail for
Time, Inc. paid off at 2.3%. I wrote three 4% letters, and became a
local hero.”) He all but stopped writing stories. And he might have
spent the rest of his days in the comfortable confines of Time, Inc.,
had it not been for a young woman named Marion McGahan.


VII

For thirty-eight years, Theodore Sturgeon has been trying not to write.
He does everything in his power, leaps at any distraction, places every
possible obstacle between himself and his typewriter and has indeed
succeeded in damming the flow for weeks or years at a time. But always
in the end his defenses fail him and a new flood of stories bursts
through.

He won’t admit it, but the real reason Ted doesn’t write is that he
doesn’t want to. His stories, the good ones, are like demons; they
possess him. He admires and takes pride in the finished product, but
mostly he resents the intrusion. He wants to be left alone.

The ’50s saw a burst of great stories from Sturgeon unlike anything
before or since. Month after month brought miracle after miracle, like a
pressurized can of genius letting go of its contents. It was an
incredible performance. Sturgeon’s defenses against writing had been
utterly superseded, and it took him years to get them in place again.

This all started in the spring of 1952, after the birth of his first
son, Robin.

Sturgeon fell in love with Marion McGahan in 1949; he was thirty-one,
and she was eighteen. They lived together in Brooklyn for a while—he
worked at Time, Inc. in Manhattan, and she worked in the Brooklyn Public
Library. They were married in 1951. (Marion was Ted’s third wife. He had
been living with a singer named Mary Mair since 1947, and had married
her in 1948; but by the time of the marriage their relationship was
already shaky, and they soon went their separate ways.)

Ted was content to go on doing what he was doing, tossing off occasional
stories for the less demanding science fiction magazines _(Fantastic
Adventures, Planet Stories)_, secure in his job (by now he’d been
transferred over to the promotion department of Time International), and
enjoying his central role in the active social life of the
science-fiction world in New York City. His current stories were
unimpressive, but he was lionized for his past achievements and his
ever-present charm.

But Marion had had this dream, for a long time, of living in the country
with a writer, and she prevailed on Ted to make it come true for her. He
dragged his feet, but … “She wasn’t happy with me working for a big,
patronizing company—also she wanted to be near her mother, who lived
upstate—there were a lot of reasons like that. More than anything else,
I hadn’t written for quite a while, and it was time I got back to my own
work.”

So they moved to a little stone house back in the woods in Congers, New
York, and Marion gave birth to a boy named Robin (after the hero of
Ted’s story “Maturity”), and Ted wrote a story called “Baby Is Three,”
which later became the centerpiece of his novel _More than Human_.

In the next fourteen months he wrote, among other things: “A Saucer of
Loneliness” (his classic story about a lonely girl, and the message she
receives from a flying saucer), “The Clinic” (another story about
loneliness and communication and love, an incredible tour de force in
which he creates not only two unforgettable people but a whole new
language—

_I say, “What’s this?” and I move the arms_.

_He say, “Violin?”_

_I say, “Yes. Make one noise, a new noise—one and one and one. Now,” I
say, “what’s this?” and I move again. “Banjo,” he say. “Guitar, maybe.”_

_“Make many noise, in set. Make a new set. And a new set. Yes?”_

_“Yes,” he say. “It’s played in chords, mostly. What are you getting
at?”_

_I bump on side of head. “You have think word and word and word and you
make set. I have think set and set and set.”_

—that makes more sense than our own), “The Touch of Your Hand,” “Mr.
Costello, Hero,” “And My Fear Is Great” (three unforgettable characters
this time, including an old woman who knows about yoga and yin and yang,
but has a hard time learning that her powers are limited by her
Victorian view of sex), “The Silken Swift” (a beautifully written fable
about two women, a man, and a unicorn), “The Sex Opposite” (there are
androgynous creatures among us), “The World Well Lost” (a taboo-breaker
about homosexuality), “The Fabulous Idiot” and “Morality” (the two other
sections of _More than Human_) and “A Way of Thinking” (another classic
Sturgeon tale, about a voodoo doll and a man who just doesn’t think the
way everyone else does—another one of those stories that makes you
wonder where this guy learned to write like that, which is a question
that has no answer).

Sturgeon’s career was taking off like a skyrocket, again. His first
books—a short-story collection in 1948, and a novel, _The Dreaming
Jewels_, in 1949—had been published by small presses specializing in
science fiction. Now he was getting contracts from respected
“mainstream” publishing houses. Farrar, Strauss published _More than
Human_ in hardcover, and it got terrific reviews (“One fears to toss
about words like ‘profundity’ and ‘greatness’ in connection with the
literature of entertainment; but it’s hard to avoid them here.”—_New
York Herald Tribune_). BMI asked him to write a science fiction opera.
Opportunity was knocking everywhere.

But there were some problems in paradise. Ted tended to spend money as
fast as it came in—sometimes faster—and so even at the height of his
productivity he was always strapped for funds and looking around for
more ways to make money. This got him involved in television—as early as
1952 he did a Studio One script and then complained to a friend
afterwards that, although the money was good, it was a tremendous amount
of work and the final results were unsatisfying. But he continued to
take TV work whenever he could find it.

Another bad habit he got into about this time was the contract dilemma.
This is a horrible thing writers and publishers do to each other, where
you sign a contract to write a book, and get some money, and then you
have to write it. Sturgeon’s success with _More than Human_ enabled him
to get a contract for a novel he wanted to write about a galactic
supermind that swallows the human race. The book was due in October
1954, at which point Sturgeon would get the second half of his advance.
Trying to write the novel kept Sturgeon from getting much other work
done. Failing to write it—sometimes an idea just won’t come when you
push at it—meant the money he was counting on didn’t materialize.
Financial pressure, guilt, a bad reputation among publishers … This
particular book project sat on Sturgeon’s back (his editor was once
heard to remark, “I know Sturgeon can write a novel in three days, but
which three days?”) for four years—it was finally completed in early
1958, and published as _The Cosmic Rape_. It was the first of many such
problem contracts, most of them compounded by Sturgeon’s ability to get
further advances on already overdue books by describing some (always
authentic) unexpected financial emergency.… Sturgeon got into this
writer’s quicksand early, and what’s amazing is that it took him so long
to go down.

1953 was a high point, but Sturgeon continued to produce extraordinary
stories in 1954 and the next few years. Many of his very best
works—“Bright Segment,” “When You’re Smiling,” “And Now the News,” “To
Here and the Easel” (a story about a painter who can’t paint),
“Hurricane Trio,” “The Other Man”—date from this period. One such story
a year would more than justify a $20,000 annual survival grant from the
National Endowment of the Arts, if there were such a thing, and Sturgeon
was turning out four or five major works a year.

Until 1958.

Tandy was born in 1954, and Noël (Ted and Marion’s second daughter, and
Ted’s fourth) in 1956. In 1957 Ted decided it was time to leave Congers,
and he and the family moved to a house in Truro, Massachusetts, near the
tip of Cape Cod. (He became friends with Kurt Vonnegut at this time; and
later Vonnegut used him as a partial model for his character Kilgore
Trout.)

Ted finally wrote _The Cosmic Rape_ that year on the Cape, along with
several short stories, one of which, “The Comedian’s Children,” about a
manipulative TV personality, was another impossible triumph—that story
tore me into little pieces when I was twelve years old, and it remains
one of the most powerful pieces of fiction I’ve ever read.

But the Cape was cold and lonely, and the Sturgeon family decided they
could live cheaper and happier in the West Indies. Ted’s mother was
teaching on St. Vincent, and she found them a place on the island of
Bequi. They arrived—three kids, possessions, etc.—and the house was too
small, noisy, no privacy … so they began months of island-hopping,
searching for a home. They ended up on Grenada. Ted had no place to
write during all this, but he kept trying. He was working on a story
called “The Man Who Lost the Sea.”

At the end of 1958, he finished the story. It was the only thing he’d
written all year. The money was long gone, patience was gone, the
romantic dream of living in the West Indies was gone. Ted’s agent sent
back the story, saying he couldn’t understand it. Eventually it sold to
_The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction_, but by that time the
Sturgeons were back in Congers, at Marion’s mother’s house, trying to
sort things out, looking for a place to settle down. Ted had finally
done it: spent an entire year working on one twelve-page story. Wrecked
by the tropics again.

(It was a beautiful story, and Martha Foley later selected it for her
_Best Short Stories of the Year_ anthology. But it didn’t pay the rent,
even in Grenada.) The years of high productivity had come to an end.

There were more great works to come, of course—two superb novels (_Venus
Plus_ X, 1960, about a world where the two sexes have merged into one;
and _Some of Your Blood_, 1961, a fictionalized case history of an
authentic vampire, due someday I think to come into its own as one of
the finer short novels of the century) and a handful of major stories
(“Need,” “Tandy’s Story,” “When You Care, When You Love,” “If All Men
Were Brothers, Would You Want One to Marry Your Sister?” and “Slow
Sculpture”) spread out over the next ten years. But the floodgates
weren’t open anymore; instead we have the occasional burst of genius
slipping through. There was a minor breakthrough in 1969–1970, after
Sturgeon’s marriage to his fourth wife, Wina, which resulted in the Hugo
and Nebula awards winner “Slow Sculpture,” plus several other stories I
liked, and several I didn’t like, and a beautiful but unfinished (and
unpublished) novel called _Godbody_. Still, looking at the total
picture, it seems fair to say that Sturgeon’s desire not-to-write has
been pretty solidly in control for the last fifteen years or more.

The question everybody asks, of course, is will his genius break free
again, will there be more great stories from Theodore Sturgeon?

I’m here to tell you I’ve studied this matter very carefully, and I
think it makes no difference. Don’t worry about it. Everything’s all
right.


VIII

_“They didn’t sing? Oh, you’ve got to hear them sing
together.…”_—Theodore Sturgeon, talking to me on the phone, 1976

My search for the man who wrote those stories has taken me many
places—but never have I felt closer to the mystery than I did one very
cold, exciting evening, after a blizzard, last February 2nd, in a small
two-room apartment in the middle of Woodstock, New York.

Robin Sturgeon (age 24) works in a paint store Tuesday through Saturday,
and plays (guitar) in Jerry Moore’s band on weekends. So Monday was the
day for me to see him, and it didn’t matter that the Monday I chose it
was snowing, with winds so wild they closed the New York Thruway.… I
just waited in the Port Authority terminal from six in the morning ’til
three in the afternoon and when I finally got off the bus that evening
into the zero-degree weather and friendly stillness of a small town
after a storm, well, I felt very pleased to be there.

I found Robin’s apartment after a minute or two—he greeted me warmly,
made a pot of coffee and a telephone call—and we started talking. A few
minutes later the others arrived: Tandy (then a senior at college, a
poet), Noël (a freshman at the same college, a would-be law student) and
Timothy (still in high school, a hiker and mountain climber). I hadn’t
expected to meet all four of Ted and Marion’s children—and I wouldn’t
have, except for that blizzard. A lucky break. The next three and a half
hours of excited conversation and collective attention—focusing conjured
up the real Theodore Sturgeon more clearly and solidly than if he’d been
sitting in the room.

(We were in Woodstock because that’s where Ted and Marion finally
settled, in 1959; and when Ted left and moved to California in 1966, the
children stayed with Marion. Now Robin has his own apartment, and the
two girls are off at college; but Woodstock is “home.”)

Early in this article I mentioned that Theodore Sturgeon and I have been
“friends of a sort” for two or three years now; and now I have to
explain why I chose those words. It’s because of something Ted said to
me several times (he never says anything just once), notably last
December.

“You ask me who to speak to; well, Wina makes the point that I don’t
have any friends. I know lots and lots of people, and lots of people
know me—lots of people feel they are my friends, and although I welcome
them, when I see them, I still don’t feel … I don’t seek anyone out.
When people come to me, that’s fine. But I really don’t reach out to
anybody.”

Ted is a slippery person. People who know him casually are dazzled by
him, because he seems so interested in them, so caring. People who know
him or have known him well invariably express strong feelings of
resentment mixed in with whatever else they feel towards him—basically,
I think, because they feel rejected, he doesn’t seem to care about them
anymore, and it hurts. The only exceptions, the only people I talked to
who did not radiate powerfully mixed feelings about Ted, were his
children. Because they are the only people I talked to who do not feel
separated from him.

And that isn’t because they’re flesh of his flesh (we all know that the
separation and resentment between parents and children can be awesome).
No, I think it’s because they’re the only people who have accepted
Theodore Sturgeon on his own terms. They’re hardly unaware of his
weaknesses—but, collectively at least, they accept them; they’re capable
of seeing things his way.

That evening in Robin’s apartment I began to comprehend what had been
staring me in the face all along: that Sturgeon’s different way of
seeing things is the key to all his problems and miracles. He’s aware of
this difference, proud of it, eager to share it with the rest of us
(there’s an evangelistic or “world-saving” current that runs through a
lot of his writing)—but he’s also ashamed of his gift, because he
learned very early that the world doesn’t like people who are different.
And so he’s been trying all his life to convince himself that he’s
really just like everybody else.

Praise him for his talent, and he’ll be pleased, on the surface; but
deep inside, you’ve reopened an ancient wound.

So he does things backwards, partly because he sees things backwards,
and inside out, and partly because he has to protect himself from a
world where pleasure is pain. He writes because his stories bring him
acceptance, and attention, and love, and like most of us he wants these
things. But like many of us, he also fears these things, and so in his
skillful and perverse way he tries not to write. And the result of these
two contrary streams eddying and flowing against each other is something
rich and strange.

The next day (after the blizzard), I talked with Marion, and she gave me
a new perspective on Ted and his procrastination. We were talking about
how maybe he would have been happier if he hadn’t had the talent to
write, and had spent his life doing something else, like fixing toys,
instead. But then it occurred to Marion that it was the same thing with
the toys—he loved to fix the children’s toys, and he did a beautiful job
of it, but over the years his office became filled with boxes and boxes
of broken toys waiting to be fixed. You could go in and pick up a fire
engine covered with dust and he’d tell you to put it down because he was
just about to get around to it. And he believed it. “It has something to
do with time in some way,” Marion said. “It’s as though everything is
always in the present.”

That’s it. The children grow up and don’t need their toys anymore, but
Ted is living—not in the past, but in an eternal present, where a moment
ago this toy was brought to him, and in another moment, just as soon as
he takes care of one or two other things, he’s going to fix it better
than new.

What is special about this man is that he cares so much about the people
and things that exist inside his moment. If you’re not in front of him
right now, you’re out of his mind completely; but the world that is
before his eyes excites him, delights him, astounds him, always—he has a
sense of wonder about everything he sees that is childlike but all the
more intense because it’s coming from an adult. He radiates enthusiasm,
and as perhaps you can imagine, he was a very wonderful father to his
children.

And as you can also imagine, he is one of the world’s worst businessmen;
and he doesn’t know it and won’t admit it and he’ll be furious with me
for writing this sentence. He still feels his manhood is on the line
here. Contracts go unsigned, letters go unwritten, he has this master
plan that he does little to implement but meanwhile he tries to prevent
his books from being reissued so they won’t interfere with the plan. He
relishes the dream of having all his work available in a uniform
edition. But deep inside him, I have to believe, there’s something that
feels much safer knowing people can’t read what he’s written.

I’m impatient, obviously, with Ted and his eternal present. But it’s
him. It’s his curse and the source of all his pain; but it’s also his
gift, the source of all his pride and accomplishment.

This is where Sturgeon’s miracles come from: they come from his ability
to take the ordinary world and see it from a different point of view,
stand it on its head and make it fascinating without taking away its
palpable reality. They come from the empathy he feels for all people who
have a different way of seeing things, and his ability to heighten the
reader’s empathy to an astonishing degree, until we are forced to agree
with the Roman playwright Terence: “I am a man: nothing human is alien
to me.”

Most of all, his stories come from his ability to care about the people
in front of him—that is, the characters in whatever story he happens to
be working on. When he writes, he lives in the eternal present of those
people and that place and time. And when he solves the central problem
of the story, or rather when the characters he has created solve it for
him, the sensation for the reader is overwhelming, because Sturgeon has
in fact solved all the problems of the world at that moment. He gives
himself entirely to each real story he writes, and when he arrives at
his solution, the reader, who has also given himself to the story,
experiences a moment of overriding intensity and liberation—regardless
of whether the resolution of the story is horrifying or beautiful (it’s
usually a little of both).

And that’s the other thing. There is someone else, other than Ted’s
children, who accepts Sturgeon completely on his own terms, and that’s
the person who is reading a Sturgeon story. The essence of reading
fiction is, as Coleridge suggested, “a willing suspension of disbelief.”
We are seduced; we give ourselves to the storyteller. We see things his
way. And if his way of seeing things is truly different, and truly
uplifting, then we experience something greater than ourselves each time
we listen to his stories.

“I was embarrassed as a kid—he had this beard and everything—I wanted
him to be straight and drive a fire truck. Later I realized I got much
more than most kids did: a sense of wonder, and the courage to use
it.”—Robin Sturgeon


IX

Theodore Sturgeon, best living American short story writer, was also the
first person in the history of the Philadelphia school system to do a
back flyaway dismount. But he worked so hard to prove himself as a
flyer, an athlete, that he disabled himself (or you could say he was
struck down by the gods, if that’s how you want to look at it). He has a
history of trying too hard.

Theodore Sturgeon is a success. He has more great stories in him, and he
may or may not get around to writing them sometime in the next few
decades. But it doesn’t matter. The man is capable of stretching out a
day’s postponement into a twenty-year sidetrack, or of compressing a
lifetime into six hours of writing. We need not concern ourselves with
trying to determine exactly where on his immeasurable time scale he
happens to be right now. What’s important to us, his readers, is that
he’s already written more heart-shaking, earth-changing great short
stories than most of us will ever have time to read.

And even if he has completed this stage of his career—which I doubt—what
of it? What has he got to prove? Is it a tragedy not to be able to do
back flyaway dismounts forever?

The best thing the public can do for a writer is leave him alone. In
which case, you ask, why have I written this essay? I didn’t do it to
call attention to the writer. I did it to call attention to the stories.

Our heroes have to have feet of clay, not so we can bring them down to
our level but so we can rise to theirs. We have to become our own
heroes; and if it’s true that these stories, “Bright Segment” and _More
than Human_ and “The Comedian’s Children” and all the rest of them, were
written by a human being, then I think there’s hope for all of us.

Meanwhile, on the outskirts of Los Angeles, Andros Sturgeon (age 6) has
brought his father a toy to be fixed; and sometime before he goes to
sleep tonight, Ted’s going to feed the rabbits.



STORY NOTES


Noël Sturgeon

The stories in this last volume of _The Complete Stories of Theodore
Sturgeon_ were written between 1973 and 1983, with the exception of
“Tuesdays are Worse,” published in 1960. In 1973, Sturgeon was living in
Los Angeles with his then-partner, Wina Sturgeon, and their son, Andros.
The relationship was rocky, however, and Sturgeon left the house and
began living in a one-room basement apartment on Vendome Street in the
Silverlake District of Los Angeles. Throughout his writing career,
Sturgeon preferred small, crowded and often, underground spaces in which
to write, but the Vendome basement apartment was the epitome of the
cave-like spaces he loved. Part of its address was the designation 1/4,
indicating its size, and it had a hobbit-like door only one-half the
size of a normal door. The apartment especially delighted Sturgeon, and
he kept it as an office for many years after he ceased living there
full-time. During this period, he was still trying to find work as a
screenwriter, and to sell his own work to filmmakers. _More Than Human_
(1953) was optioned by different parties, including Orson Welles, from
the early 1970s until about 2000, but a film has not been made to date.
In 1974, a French film was made of Sturgeon’s short story, “Bright
Segment,” (Volume 8) directed by Christian Chalonge. _Parcelles
Brilliante_ aired that year on the French TV series _Histoires
Insolites_, and the film was often used by Sturgeon in his writing
classes.

In 1975, he won the Inkpot Award from the San Diego Comic Convention, in
recognition of the influence of his story, “It,” on comic-book creations
such as The Swamp Thing. In 1977, he won an Outstanding Achievement
Award from the International Society of Science Fiction, Horror and
Fantasy for the _Star Trek_ screenplay, “Amok Time” (one of three _Star
Trek_ screenplays he wrote. “Shore Leave” aired on 12/29/66 and “Amok
Time” on 9/15/67; this latter episode is famous for giving Spock a sex
life and inventing the “Live long and prosper” Vulcan greeting. “The Joy
Machine” was never aired but was later expanded by James Gunn and
published as a book.)

From 1969 onwards, Sturgeon had begun to publish both stories and book
reviews in a market new for him: “men’s” magazines (_Knight, Adam, Chic,
Hustler_, and _Penthouse_). Sturgeon had frequently expressed
frustration that straitlaced rules in publishing prevented him from
writing explicitly about sex; now he had that freedom. Since the early
1960s, he had been writing a novel, _Godbody_, which told a tale of a
Jesus-like figure who saw sex as a combination of love and worship. It
contained several explicit sex scenes, and he felt unable to publish it
(or indeed finish it) as a result. In the middle 1970s, he began working
again on the novel, and it was published posthumously in 1986 (despite a
persistent rumor, the posthumous work was not rewritten by Robert
Heinlein; however, the similarities between _Godbody_ and Heinlein’s
_Stranger in a Strange Land_ are noticeable, and not too surprising
given that the writing of both stems from the early 1960s). Whether or
not this new freedom to write explicitly about sex produced better work
is for the reader to judge; several stories written for this market can
be found in this volume.

Around 1975, after his relationship with Wina ended, Sturgeon met Jayne
Tannehill Englehart, a teacher and aspiring writer, at a science-fiction
convention. As they became partners and began living together, Jayne
changed her last name to Sturgeon; to others, Ted always called her
“Lady Jayne.” Jayne’s exceptional organizing talents and financial
know-how were of crucial assistance to Sturgeon in overcoming crushing
accumulated debt, disarray in his business affairs, and unmet
obligations to his Woodstock and Los Angeles families. His inability to
manage his business affairs effectively had been a longstanding
frustration for him; while contemporaries such as Robert Heinlein,
Arthur C. Clarke, and Ray Bradbury became relatively wealthy, Sturgeon
had always struggled financially. In 1977, in a letter to his lawyer;
his domestic, film and international agents; a new business manager; and
Paul Williams (who managed his copyrights), he says:

I want to be a writer who writes. The purpose of this letter is to bring
this about. A year or so I had a blinding insight, brought about by a
radio commercial (Brentwood Savings, to give credit where it is due)
which contained the line: Fifty-one percent of smart is knowing what you
are dumb at. Now, I have lots of documentation that I am real smart,
from a shelf full of trophies to listings in Who’s Who and the Hall of
Fame, and because of that I have always been certain that I could do
anything—once I put my mind to it. Time enough to look at that tax stuff
come April 13. Pay that traffic ticket “later.” Things like that. And,
insidiously, over the years, I have achieved a towering triumph of
mismanagement, and find myself, and my irreplaceable time, concerned
with matters I am dumb at, instead of writing. I am now ready to concede
and confess this, and to surround myself with the people who, in my most
carefully considered judgment, are the best in the world at what they
do, to the end that I may become simply and solely a writer-who-writes,
while we all benefit.… I cannot close without a mention of my Lady
Jayne. Wina and I came to the parting of the ways a year ago last April.
In July I met Jayne, and I feel altogether confident in asserting that I
have at last found what I have been looking for since I was born—no less
than that. Although I refuse to make her my secretary, I will say that
she has a solid grasp on reality and reality’s priorities, and will see
to it in every way humanly possible that I take care of things in the
proper order. She understands taxes and trust funds, investments and
banking. And me. I have never been happier in my life, nor had more to
work for.

His relationship with Jayne began an extremely happy and productive
stage of Sturgeon’s life during which, though he wrote few stories, he
became deeply involved in teaching writing and presenting at
science-fiction conventions around the country. He loved to work with
students, especially young writers, a role well suited to him as a
charismatic legend with a message (as former students such as Octavia
Butler have fondly recalled). He taught summer courses for several years
at the Intensive English Institute on the Teaching of Science Fiction,
run by James Gunn and hosted by the Center for the Study of Science
Fiction at the University of Kansas, Lawrence. (Gunn later helped
establish the annual Sturgeon Short Story Award in 1987, one of the most
prestigious awards in science fiction.) Sturgeon also taught short
writing courses at other colleges and made public presentations around
the U.S. and in Europe, particularly France, Ireland, and England. His
dizzying travel schedule for the last years of his life was thoroughly
organized by Jayne, and not incidentally, began to pay his debts. In
1982, a French TV series, _De bien estranges,_ aired an episode,
“L’amour qui tue,” based on the short story, “The Wages of Synergy”
(Volume Seven). The organization of his papers by Jayne made possible
the publication of four new collections of Sturgeon stories: _Visions
and Venturers_ (1978), _The Stars Are the Styx_ (1979), _The Golden
Helix_ (1979), and _Alien Cargo_ (1984); the latter three collections
were inspired and edited by Paul Williams, and can be seen as an early
attempt by Paul to find a way to republish many of Sturgeon’s
difficult-to-find short stories, which culminated in _The Complete
Stories_ project.

From 1976 to 1985, after a brief period of living in San Diego, Jayne
and Ted shuttled regularly between Los Angeles (where his son Andros
lived) and Springfield, Oregon. Diagnosed in 1976 as suffering from
idiopathic diffuse interstitial fibrosis of the lungs, by 1984, Sturgeon
found it harder and harder to breathe and engage in regular activities.
In January of 1985, he went alone to Maui to try an alternative healing
regimen. When it was apparent that the regimen was failing, he returned
to Springfield, very ill. He died in the hospital in Eugene on May 8,
1985. Present were Jayne; two family friends, Charles Holloway and
Rennie Cantine; six of his seven children (Patricia, Robin, Tandy, Noël,
Timothy, and Andros); and his third wife, Marion. He was 67. With a
strange prescience, one of his most famous and beloved stories, “The Man
Who Lost the Sea” (Volume 10), contains a detailed description of how it
feels to die from lack of air.

After Sturgeon’s death, obituaries in _The New York Times_, many
regional papers, _Locus Magazine_ and other science fiction outlets
recognized his stature as a writer, and his significant influence on the
field of science fiction as well as the broader culture. Two _Twilight
Zone_ episodes were aired in 1986, “A Saucer of Loneliness” (Sturgeon
claimed that Mama Cass of the pop group Mamas and the Papas was a
special fan of “A Saucer of Loneliness” [Volume Seven], and when
approached about filming it, he recommended that she play the part of
the female protagonist. The _Twilight Zone_ episode, written by David
Gerrold, had Shelley Duvall in the main role), and “A Matter of Minutes”
(based on his story “Yesterday Was Monday” [Volume 2] and written by
Harlan Ellison® and Rockne S. O’Bannon). In 2000, he was awarded the
Gaylactica Spectrum Award for his ground-breaking 1953 story about
homosexuality, “The World Well Lost” (Volume 7). Also, in 2000, Sturgeon
was elected to the Science Fiction Hall of Fame, now based in the
Science Fiction Museum in Seattle, which displays several
Sturgeon-related objects, including the portrait of Sturgeon painted by
Ed Emshwiller which was used as the cover for the collection _E Pluribus
Unicorn_ (1953) as well as Volume 7 of this series, a letter from
Heinlein to Sturgeon suggesting story ideas, and a copy of the Pioneer
10 plaque from the Apollo mission signed to Ted by Carl Sagan, one of
its designers. (The Pioneer 10 and 11 unmanned space missions were the
first to travel past the solar system into deep space, and the plaques
were designed to communicate our location and physique to alien
intelligences. A few of the plaques were given to artists, writers and
musicians who in Sagan’s judgment were influential representatives of
human cultural production; Sturgeon was one of them.) In 2005, a play
based on his story, “The Graveyard Reader” (Volume Ten), ran as part of
the Theater Phantastique at the Wooden-O Theater in Los Angeles. In
2005, Jon Knautz directed a short film from the short story “The Other
Celia” (Volume Nine); it aired on the Canadian Broadcasting Company in
January 2008. Consistently appearing on numerous “best of sf” lists,
_More Than Human_ has been in print since it was published in 1953, and
Sturgeon’s fiction continues to be sold around the world.

“TUESDAYS ARE WORSE” (_Chatelaine: The Canadian Home Journal_, vol 33,
no 1, January 1960). Teaser: “Les lived with a fear he could not talk
about. It followed him home, to be borne though not understood by Angela
and their child … until that night. A story no married couple should
miss.” The abusive behavior of the father in this story recalls
Sturgeon’s description of his treatment as a child by his stepfather,
found in the autobiographical essay _Argyll_ (1993). My thanks to
William F. Seabrook, Sturgeon bibliographer extraordinaire, for finding
this story in time to include it.

“CASE AND THE DREAMER” (_Galaxy_, January 1973) Reprinted in _Case and
the Dreamer_ (Doubleday 1974), which also contained the novellas “If All
Men Were Brothers, Would You Let One Marry Your Sister?” and “When You
Care, When You Love” (both in Volume Eleven). “Case” was written
originally as a pilot for NBC. The dedication to the Doubleday volume
reads: “For Herb Solow, without whom Case would never have been
written.” Herb Solow was an agent, TV producer and at one time head of
MGM Studios. He met Sturgeon when he worked for Desilu Studios, which
produced _Star Trek_. “Case and the Dreamer” was never completed as a
pilot.

“AGNES, ACCENT AND ACCESS” (_Galaxy_, April 1973) Teaser: “The computer
knew the answer to everything—except Agnes!” Written many years before
desktop or laptop computers were invented, this detailed imagination of
such a device reads more and more over time like the machines we use
today. Perhaps subvocalization of voice-directed typing programs is one
step away. Sturgeon’s third wife, Marion, grew up in the Bronx, and
though she did not usually have a noticeable accent, it could be brought
out under times of stress, an effect her children delighted in
producing. (An irony is that many of the stories in these last two
volumes were put into electronic form through the use of MacSpeech
Dictate, a voice-directed program that consistently mishears my New
York-inflected pronunciation of “orange” as “are range.”)

“INGENIOUS AYLMER” (_Harper’s_, December 1973) This is one of two very
short stories featuring the character Ejler Edgar Aylmer, an eccentric
genius who works in his basement.

“THE SHERIFF OF CHAYUTE” (_Sturgeon’s West_, Doubleday 1973). The series
of western stories of which “Sheriff” is one were credited “with Don
Ward,” but as made clear for the earlier stories published in Volumes 10
and 11, they were written solely by Sturgeon, sometimes from ideas
bounced off his friend Ward, the editor of _Zane Grey’s Western
Magazine_.

“THE MYSTERIUM” (Circa 1974–1976. Previously unpublished.) The original
manuscript is typed on the letterhead with two unicorns most commonly
used during the period in the middle 1970s when Sturgeon lived in the
small apartment on Vendome Street in Los Angeles. Though he kept this
apartment after 1976, when he began his relationship with Jayne Williams
and began to spend time in San Diego and then in Eugene, Oregon, it is
likely that this story was written earlier than that time. Sturgeon’s
invention of a noun “woodstocker,” and verb “woodstocking” as describing
making a living from music festivals is interesting, because of his time
spent living in Woodstock, NY in the early and middle 1960s. It is
possible that this story is unfinished.

“ ‘I LOVE MAPLE WALNUT’ ” (_Harper’s_, May 1974) This is the second very
short story written about the inventor Ejler Edgar Aylmer. William F.
Seabrook provides the following note of interest about the _Harper’s_
stories: “They appeared in a section of the magazine called
‘Wraparound,’ a series of pieces relating to a common theme. One month
the theme was Love, and along with [Sturgeon’s] short-short story [‘ “I
Love Maple Walnut” ’], they published ‘The Irish Girl’s Lament’; as this
was also included in, and gave the title for, [the Sturgeon story] ‘And
My Fear Is Great,’ [Volume Seven] surely this must have been at his
suggestion.” (Seabrook, personal communication) Sturgeon indeed
constantly promoted “The Irish Girl’s Lament” as one of the most
beautiful statements written about love, in his opinion, and it is
quoted in full in the story “And My Fear Is Great.” The poem was
collected by W.B. Yeats, and is used in the movie version of James
Joyce’s “The Dead,” directed by John Huston.

“BLUE BUTTER” (_Fantasy and Science Fiction_, October 1974) Teaser:
“From the one writer in this issue whose name also appeared on the front
cover of Vol. 1, No. 1, Fall 1949, a small story with a huge theme,
about the day in which a computer reads out the Final Extrapolation.
Ladies and Gentlemen, Theodore Sturgeon …” In an incident that mirrors
the one in the story, in 1968, Sturgeon’s fourteen-year old daughter
Tandy accidentally ran through a plate glass door and suffered multiple
wounds and extensive bleeding. Sturgeon was present and administered
first aid, possibly saving her life.

“THE SINGSONG OF CECILY SNOW” (_Heavy Metal_, October 1977) An example
of Sturgeon’s lyrical fantasy writing, reminiscent of his “unicorn
story,” “The Silken-Swift,” (Volume 7) which is discussed by Peter S.
Beagle in his introduction to this volume.

“HARRY’S NOTE” (_Chrysalis_, Roy Torgeson, ed., Zebra 1977) Another
example of Sturgeon’s belief that empathy (or love) is a key to human
evolution and survival, but in a very pessimistic rendering. Did
Sturgeon really meet Leary, Metzner, and Alpert in Woodstock? There was
indeed a Café Espresso in the town, and Leary, and possibly the others,
were often at Millbrook, just across the Hudson River from the Woodstock
area. As Sturgeon was fond of saying after recounting an improbable
version of what had actually happened, “it could have been.” The
evocation of the Golden Rule with the phrase: “do as you would be done
by” echoes of one of Sturgeon’s favorite children’s books, _The Water
Babies_, by Charles Kingsley (1862–63), which featured a good fairy,
Mrs. Doasyouwouldbedoneby and a bad fairy, Mrs. Bedonebyasyoudid. The
phrase “Thou art God,” of course, evokes the famous Robert A. Heinlein
novel, _Strangers in a Strange Land_ (1961). Sturgeon and Heinlein were
good friends, and though they disagreed politically (particularly about
the economy and about the necessity of war), they shared an interest in
challenging social strictures on nudity and sex, and a strong distaste
for organized religion. Heinlein named his fictional character “Waldo”
and the manipulative devices Waldo invents “waldoes” in honor of
Sturgeon’s birthname (Sturgeon was born Edward Hamilton Waldo). The term
“waldoes” took and is still in use in scientific laboratories today.
Sturgeon named a character in his story “The Other Man” (Volume 9)
“Anson,” Heinlein’s middle name, in gratitude for Heinlein’s suggesting
the story idea to him. Resonances of this long relationship, and the
close parallels between Sturgeon’s novel _Godbody_, and Heinlein’s
_Stranger_, are also apparent in two stories in this volume: “The
Country of Afterward,” and “The Trick,” below. Heinlein died three years
to the day after Sturgeon, on May 8, 1988.

“TIME WARP” (_Omni Magazine_, October 1978; Reprinted in the _Best of
Omni Science Fiction No. 2_, Ben Bova, ed., Omni Pub, 1981). Teaser from
the original: “She was held by a force beam and bending over her was one
of the members of the Mindpod.” Editorial afterword from Ben Bova and
Robert Myrus, in the _Best of Omni_ collection: “Theodore Sturgeon,
prominent SF short story writer for more than thirty years and author of
several novels, most notably _More Than Human_, an International Fantasy
Award winner, is famous as a stylist and for his preoccupation with the
ameliorating power of love. In ‘Time Warp,’ Sturgeon seems to be saying
that in both matters of politics and of the heart, sometimes the way to
get ahead is to go along.” The character Will Hawkline, the epitome of
the macho hero, is presented by Sturgeon as constantly endangering his
allies through his aggressive and egotistic tendencies. Hawkline could
be seen as a (fond) critique of “space opera” science fiction, with
Captain James T. Kirk as possibly the most recent example in his mind,
given Sturgeon’s experience on the _Star Trek_ set (where he made good
friends of many of the cast of the first _Star Trek_ series). In both of
the televised _Star Trek_ scripts written by Sturgeon, “Shore Leave” and
“Amok Time,” the plots feature Kirk’s physical bravery and the joy he
finds in one-on-one fighting, as well as the risks to others involved in
his attraction to violence and heroic deeds.

“THE COUNTRY OF AFTERWARD” (_Hustler_, January 1979) Sturgeon writes, in
a 1978 letter to his agent, Kirby McCauley: _“I have just sold Larry
Flynt [publisher of_ Hustler_] pubs my very first explicit sex story.
It’s a blockbuster with a great many important things to say during the
bumps and moans.”_ The theme of this story echoes the ideas in
Sturgeon’s posthumously published novel, _Godbody_ (1986), which he
worked on from the early 1960s. That sex and love were forms of
spiritual worship, and that the open exploration and expression of the
relationship between them would cure many of the world’s ills (including
war, cancer, inequality and exploitation), was one of Sturgeon’s
enduring beliefs and a constant message in much of his writing. This
argument, along with the other repeated theme of human connection and
gestalt, was an important influence on the counterculture of the 1960s
and 1970s (see David Crosby’s introduction to Volume 6). The characters
in this story remind this reader, at least, of Heinlein’s _Stranger in a
Strange Land;_ an older, powerful man is adored by sexy young women,
who, although talented, highly educated people with advanced
professional degrees, seem to prefer spending most of their time having
sex with older men as a means to create a better world.

“LIKE YESTERDAY” (_Rolling Stone_, May 20, 1979) Certainly a story that
reverberates today, as the movement to legalize marijuana gains
strength. Sturgeon was not a pot smoker himself, claiming that he didn’t
get much of a high when he did try it.

“WHY DOLPHINS DON’T BITE” (_Omni_, in three parts, published February,
March and April, 1980), reprinted in _Medea’s World_ (Harlan Ellison®,
ed., Phantasia 1985). Written as part of the collaborative venture
started by Harlan Ellison®, in which several science-fiction writers
wrote stories based in a common setting, Medea’s World. Some of the
ideas in this story are shocking (for example, that cannibalism and
incest might confer important powers of interstellar, interspecies and
time-travelling communication), demonstrating Sturgeon’s comfort with
imagining truly horrible things (as exemplified by such horror tales as
“It,” “Bianca’s Hands” (both in Volume 1), “The Professor’s Teddy Bear”
(Volume Four), and _Some of Your Blood_ (1961). “Dolphins” also repeats
a theme that appears in many places in Sturgeon’s work (as noted by Paul
Williams in his essay in this volume): that humans are excluded from an
ability held by other species across the universe to simultaneously and
immediately access ideas, skills, and information from collectively
produced sources (See “Time Warp” [in this volume], “The Skills of
Xanadu” [Volume 9], _To Marry Medusa_, “The Touch of Your Hand” [Volume
7], and _More Than Human_). Had Sturgeon lived seven more years, he
would have experienced the World-Wide Web, which in many ways—especially
email, search engines and wikis—realizes this persistent vision of
instantaneous sharing of information and global communication. Given the
questions raised in this story, would Sturgeon have judged the Internet
to be crucifix or pogo-stick?

“VENGEANCE IS.” (_Dark Forces_, Kirby McCauley, ed., Viking 1980).
Editor’s introduction: “Theodore Sturgeon, born on Staten Island, New
York, old American stock dating back to 1640, is one of the acknowledged
masters of modern fantasy and science fiction, both in his short work
and in such fine novels as _More Than Human_ and _The Dreaming Jewels_.
His styles are many: witty, spare, hard-boiled, and lyrically
expressive. He’s a remarkably inventive and powerful writer and there is
reason to suspect his best stories will be remembered long after those
of nearly all now posing for posterity and academic circles and in the
literary quarterlies. Harlan Ellison once observed that Theodore
Sturgeon knows more about love than anyone he’d ever met. And, in fact,
the Sturgeon you might meet is earnest, warm, and sympathetic, a man
whom you immediately feel cares and understands. But, as the story
testifies, he also understands the hurtful, twisted the side of human
nature.” Written with the example of _candida_ in mind, this story
predates the appearance of HIV/AIDS, but Sturgeon was amazed at the
resonances of the story with that epidemic when it occurred. (Personal
communication, Jayne Williams.)

“SEASONING” 1981. In a letter to his agent, Kirby McCauley, Sturgeon
says that this story was published in 1981 by Goldmann in Germany, but I
have not been able to confirm this. Otherwise, it is previously
unpublished. The ideas outlined in this story echo the “Macro
Philosophy” of Thea Alexander found in her science-fiction book, _2150
A.D_. There is a significant difference, however, in the idea that
“entities” are creating “scripts” not just out of curiosity in order to
have new experiences (as Alexander presents them), but in order to try
to find universal truths, identifying which ones could form a lasting
ethos by working them out in different contexts, different worlds. This
is an amendment created by Jayne and Ted. (Jayne Williams, personal
communication) The ethos offered here, that in the face of war, violent
competition and suffering, one should and can create something good from
what one has to work with, and share it, is pure Sturgeon. At the time
of the writing of this story, Jayne Sturgeon was an ordained minister of
the American Holistic Church, and was teaching a course in Universal Law
in San Diego. The character in this story, Alice—with her long brown
hair and blue eyes, her ability to wait and listen while someone worked
something through, her peals of laughter—is clearly modeled on Jayne.
Sturgeon dabbled in many forms of therapy and later, self-help or New
Age philosophies, but never remained a proponent of any one of them.
Besides the Freudian analysis described in “Baby is Three” (Volume 6),
and the LSD-assisted therapy he engaged in the late 1960s with the
therapist Jim Hayes (an experience influencing the story “The Beholders”
in Volume 12), Sturgeon was an “auditor” during the early period of
Dianetics, went through an EST workshop in the early 1980s, and, with
Jayne, explored Macro Philosophy and the tenets of the American Holistic
church. Despite these experiences with different philosophies,
religions, and therapies, he remained most attached to the themes
expressed in his own writing. On a side note, the dish the main
character cooks in this story is a classic Sturgeon culinary creation;
worth trying, at least once, if just for the visual presentation, which
is entirely science-fictional.

“NOT AN AFFAIR” _Fantasy and Science Fiction_, October 1983. Written in
1981, and originally submitted to Playboy, but removed by Sturgeon from
consideration when, according to him: _“… the Playboy editors scrawled
and scratched (‘Eliminate the first six pages. Make the reporter a
(militant) woman.’).” F&SF_ editor’s teaser: “Here is a rare short story
from Ted Sturgeon, whose last appearance here was in the 25th
anniversary issue (October 1974). Like many Sturgeon stories, it
concerns an aspect of love, but it begins with an epidemic.…”

“BLACK MOCCASINS,” 1983. Previously unpublished. In a letter written to
Kirby McCauley, Sturgeon says: _“Herewith short story, mainstream, prob.
women’s market, Black Moccasins.”_ The letter is headed: _“Lawrence,
Kansas: On the road. July 30, 1983.”_ Sturgeon was in Kansas for the
summer science-fiction writing course he taught for many years for the
Intensive English Institute on the Teaching of Science Fiction founded
by James Gunn. It is possible the story was written during the time he
was teaching the class. This story’s detailed description of ways to
save money was typical of Sturgeon, and many of his letters recount such
economies with excruciating good humor. For much of his life he was very
poor, and yet he delighted in describing in detail how he managed to get
by through methods such as gluing new soles on his shoes, eating
mayonnaise sandwiches, and heating soup in a can with a soldering iron.
Years of poor nutrition and skipped doctor visits surely contributed to
his early death (and eating soup heated with a soldering iron very
likely didn’t help).

“THE TRICK” (_Chic_, January 1984). Teaser: “They could talk about
coffee; they could talk about the weather. They could talk about
everything but the trick. To believe it—you had to see it.” It’s likely
that this story was written earlier than its publication date of 1984,
as it continues the adventures of the characters in “The Country of
Afterward” (in this volume), though with a much slimmer plot. In a weird
echo of the Kurt Vonnegut character, Kilgore Trout, (who was based on
Sturgeon), a science-fiction writer who also wrote pornography, this
foray into pornography by Sturgeon was not very successful either as
story or as pornography, in my opinion. I like to think Vonnegut, who
called Sturgeon “one of the best writers in America,” (see his foreword
in Volume Seven), would have appreciated this irony.

“GRIZZLY” 1983. _Not The Reader_, Summer. _Not the Reader_ was a free
city weekly published in San Diego, where Sturgeon lived off and on from
1976 to 1980. His experience as a patient with diffuse interstitial
pneumonitis clearly informs this piece. His condition was idiopathic;
that is, the doctors were unable to determine the exact cause, usually
exposure to asbestos. As a result he went through many tests. Sturgeon
theorized that he had been possibly exposed from his years in the
Merchant Marine (whose ships’ interiors were lined with asbestos), or
from living in so many basement apartments, but his preferred culprit
was his favorite Zippo butane lighter, which pulled the lighter-fluid
fumes down and through a tiny asbestos filter into the pipe, and thus
the lungs. (Jayne Williams, personal communication). “Grizzly” is the
last story Sturgeon wrote.



ABOUT THEODORE STURGEON


Theodore Sturgeon was born on February 26, 1918 and died in Eugene,
Oregon, on May 8, 1985. A resident of New York City, Woodstock, New
York, Los Angeles, and Springfield, Oregon, he was the author of more
than thirty novels and short story collections. He won the International
Fantasy Award for his novel _More Than Human;_ the Hugo Award and Nebula
Award for his short story _Slow Sculpture;_ the Outstanding Achievement
Award from the International Society of Science Fiction, Horror and
Fantasy for the _Star Trek_ screenplay, “Amok Time”; and the
Gaylactica/Spectrum Award for his ground-breaking story about
homosexuality, “The World Well Lost.” For the influence on comic books
of his short story _It_, he won the Inkpot Award. His idea of “bleshing”
(the interaction of different individuals in a gestalt, from _More Than
Human_) was influential for performers from The Grateful Dead to the
Blue Man Group. He was known for the creation of Sturgeon’s Law (Every
genre, without exception, is 90% crap) and the credo: “Ask the next
question.” For his lifetime of work, he was awarded a World Fantasy
Achievement Award, and was inducted into the Science Fiction Hall of
Fame in 2000.

[]
