[]

[]

Theodore Sturgeon, in his office/workshop in Woodstock, New York. This
picture, taken circa 1962, was for a glue advertisement in _Scientific
American_. The rocket is the International Fantasy Award, received for
_More Than Human_ in 1954.

[]

Copyright © 2003 the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Previously
published materials copyright © 1955, 1956, 1957, 1999 by Theodore
Sturgeon and the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust, except “The Waiting
Thing Inside” and “The Deadly Innocent,” which are copyright © 1956 by
Don Ward and Theodore Sturgeon and the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust.
All rights reserved. No portion of this book, except for brief review,
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
form or by any means—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise—without written permission of the publisher.

Published by
North Atlantic Books
P.O. Box 12327
Berkeley, California 94712

Cover photograph of an ophicleide by Grant D. Green
Cover design by Paula Morrison

_And Now the News…_ is sponsored by the Society for the Study of Native
Arts and Sciences, a nonprofit educational corporation whose goals are
to develop an educational and cross-cultural perspective linking various
scientific, social, and artistic fields; to nurture a holistic view of
arts, sciences, humanities, and healing; and to publish and distribute
literature on the relationship of mind, body, and nature.

North Atlantic Books’ publications are available through most
bookstores. For further information, visit our website at
www.northatlanticbooks.com or call 800-733-3000.

The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:

Sturgeon, Theodore.
   And now the news— / by Theodore Sturgeon ; edited by Paul Williams ;
foreword by David G. Hartwell.
       p. cm. — (The complete stories of Theodore Sturgeon ; v. 9)
   eISBN: 978-1-58394-753-1
   1. Science fiction, American.  I. Williams, Paul, 1948–  II. Title.
   PS3569.T875 A6 1994 vol. 9
   813′.54—dc21

2003013883

v3.1



EDITOR’S NOTE


THEODORE HAMILTON STURGEON was born February 26, 1918, and died May 8,
1985. This is the ninth of a series of volumes that will collect all of
his short fiction of all types and all lengths shorter than a novel. The
volumes and the stories within the volumes are organized chronologically
by order of composition (insofar as it can be determined). This ninth
volume contains stories written in 1955, 1956, and 1957. Five have never
before appeared in a Sturgeon collection.

Preparation of each of these volumes would not be possible without the
hard work and invaluable participation of Noël Sturgeon, Debbie Notkin,
and our publishers, Lindy Hough and Richard Grossinger. I would also
like to thank, for their significant assistance with this volume, David
G. Hartwell, the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust, Kim Charnovsky, Robin
Sturgeon, Marion Sturgeon, Jayne Williams, Ralph Vicinanza, Paula
Morrison, Dixon Chandler, Cindy Lee Berryhill, T. V. Reed, and all of
you who have expressed your interest and support.

BOOKS BY THEODORE STURGEON

_Without Sorcery (1948)_

_The Dreaming Jewels [aka The Synthetic Man] (1950)_

_More Than Human (1953)_

_E Pluribus Unicorn (1953)_

_Caviar (1955)_

_A Way Home (1955)_

_The King and Four Queens (1956)_

_I, Libertine (1956)_

_A Touch of Strange (1958)_

_The Cosmic Rape [aka To Marry Medusa] (1958)_

_Aliens 4 (1959)_

_Venus Plus X (1960)_

_Beyond (1960)_

_Some of Your Blood (1961)_

_Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea (1961)_

_The Player on the Other Side (1963)_

_Sturgeon in Orbit (1964)_

_Starshine (1966)_

_The Rare Breed (1966)_

_Sturgeon Is Alive and Well … (1971)_

_The Worlds of Theodore Sturgeon (1972)_

_Sturgeon’s West (with Don Ward) (1973)_

_Case and the Dreamer (1974)_

_Visions and Venturers (1978)_

_Maturity (1979)_

_The Stars Are the Styx (1979)_

_The Golden Helix (1979)_

_Alien Cargo (1984)_

_Godbody (1986)_

_A Touch of Sturgeon (1987)_

_The [Widget], the [Wadget], and Boff_ (_1989_)

_Argyll_ (_1993_)

Star Trek, The Joy Machine (with James Gunn) (1996)

THE COMPLETE STORIES SERIES

1. _The Ultimate Egoist (1994)_

2. _Microcosmic God (1995)_

3. _Killdozer!_ (_1996_)

4. _Thunder and Roses (1997)_

5. _The Perfect Host (1998)_

6. _Baby Is Three (1999)_

7. _A Saucer of Loneliness (2000)_

8. _Bright Segment (2002)_

9. _And Now the News …_ (_2003_)

10. _The Man Who Lost the Sea (2005)_

11. _The Nail and the Oracle (2007)_

12. _Slow Sculpture (2009)_

13. _Case and the Dreamer (2010)_



CONTENTS


_Cover_

_Title Page_

_Copyright_

Editor’s Note

_Other Books by This Author_

Foreword by David G. Hartwell

“Won’t You Walk …?”

New York Vignette

The Half-Way Tree Murder

The Skills of Xanadu

The Claustrophile

Dead Dames Don’t Dial

Fear Is a Business

The Other Man

The Waiting Thing Inside (with Don Ward)

The Deadly Innocent (with Don Ward)

And Now the News …

The Girl Had Guts

The Other Celia

Affair with a Green Monkey

The Pod in the Barrier

Story Notes by Paul Williams



FOREWORD


By David G. Hartwell

I became a dedicated reader and collector of science fiction and
fantasy, and supernatural horror fiction, in the 1950s. At the end of
the decade in 1959 I went to college and won a book collection prize
there, with only a hundred hardcovers. Among the ornaments of that
collection were the Sturgeon books, including first editions of _Without
Sorcery_, his first book, and _More Than Human_, his most ambitious
novel. Part of winning the prize involved explaining something of the
significance of the books.

Four decades later, I do not recall what I wrote then, but I do know
that I had been introduced to Sturgeon’s short fiction in the sixth
grade and looked forward to everything by him from then on. And still
vivid in my memory is the Saturday afternoon in late 1953 or early 1954
when I walked into a news store in Lock Haven, Pennsylvania, where I had
bought a few SF magazines before, and was pointed to the paperback rack
by the proprietor. There I found and bought my first two SF paperbacks,
Sturgeon’s _More than Human_ and Arthur C. Clarke’s _Childhood’s End_.
That was the first year I bought and owned books, and these were
treasures. I read them with intense concentration and delight. Nearly
ten years later, after studying William Faulkner’s novels, I re-read
_More Than Human_ and liked it and admired it even more.

Somehow very early in my reading I came to think of Sturgeon as the best
writer of science fiction, fantasy, and horror. I would read anything he
published, follow him beyond my normal comfort zones because of the
rewards of reading his stories, not something I would do for many
writers (such was my loyalty to SF at the time). I also recall my
delight when he became a book reviewer for _Venture SF_ in the late 50s
and published his famous column explaining Sturgeon’s Law for the
general readership; it had first been revealed in a 1953 Philcon speech
later reprinted in a fanzine. He was one of Ray Bradbury’s mentors (and
Bradbury was at his peak then, publishing knockout stories and books).
He was admired by Damon Knight, my favorite reviewer. Other writers and
editors mentioned him in reverent tones in print. I thought he was a
great writer. I still do.

As the years passed, I began to attend SF conventions, read fanzines,
and hear gossip about Sturgeon, mainly about his writing blocks, his
nudism, and his love life. He was famous for all three. I finally met
him for the first time in 1972 at the Clarion writing workshop in East
Lansing, Michigan, where he borrowed $200.00 through me to make a
payment that was pressing. Fred Pohl laughed at me the next week and
said I would never get it back, but it was repaid shortly thereafter. I
was so pleased that I would gladly have given up the money to know
Sturgeon. At Clarion I was privileged to listen to his Monday morning
lecture to the writing students, which was full of sophisticated and
useful advice and ideas, so full that I could tell that the students
were not getting much from it. But I still remember a lot of it and use
it in my own teaching. There exist tapes of Sturgeon teaching a writer’s
workshop late in his life that may someday become commercially
available. And I arranged to interview Sturgeon at the 1972 World SF
Convention in Los Angeles a month or so later for _Crawdaddy_ magazine,
in which I then had a science fiction column. It’s a long interview
filled with lots of Sturgeon’s personal ideas and perceptions of books,
stories about his life and friends, interesting stuff that I recommend
to all interested parties.

For instance:

I skipped two and a half years of my primary schooling. I left the fifth
grade and took eight weeks in summer school and went to high school at
not quite twelve years old.… And I was very underweight and undersized
and a natural target for everyone around me. And I was pretty well
brutalized by that whole thing. We didn’t have school buses in those
days and we lived three miles away and we used to have these six miles
to walk every day through all kinds of neighborhoods. I had to figure
out different ways to go each day, because kids would lay for me on the
way. I had curly golden hair and I was very thin and kind of whey-faced
and pretty. And I was just an absolute target. When I was in high school
I discovered apparatus gymnastics, and that became my total
preoccupation. In a year and a half or so I gained four inches and sixty
pounds, and I became captain and manager of my gym team, which is
literally a transfiguration. I was totally born again. And the very kids
that used to bully me used to follow me around and carry my books and it
was a really incredible difference.

And:

Well, somebody brought me a volume 1, number 1 of _Unknown_, and said,
boy, this is what you should be writing.… I was absolutely thrilled with
the magazine. And somebody suggested that I go up and see Campbell [the
editor]. Well, you know, I was overawed, and so I wrote a little story
and took it up to him, and he pointed out to me how that wasn’t a story
at all—it didn’t have the structure of a story—but he told me to come
back and see him again, and so I wrote a story called “Ether Breather,”
and that was my first sale to him.… I produced just enormously in those
eighteen months, two years or so, I produced dozens of stories.

(The full interview was published in _The New York Review of Science
Fiction_, #7 and #8, March and April 1989.)

I was also then a consulting editor for New American Library and as a
result of the conversations surrounding that interview I bought a
collection of three novellas from him (it was my idea, because I wanted
to have his last great novella, _When You Care, When You Love_,
reprinted in book form) that was published in paperback a year later. I
knew him for the rest of his life, not as a close friend but as a fellow
professional. Whenever we met he would launch into a sincere monologue
on his current obsession for a few minutes, but would also frequently
tell a joke or two. He had a reedy, nasal voice, but told jokes well.

Here’s an example of his humor:

A young couple are in love, in bed, engaged in passionate foreplay,
really beginning to work up a sweat.

She says: “Oh, god, this is so wonderful. It’s like I am Queen Elizabeth
and you are Sir Walter Raleigh,” and with that she reaches orgasm,
moaning and gasping with delight.

The young man is still pumping away energetically.

Minutes pass.

Suddenly in a frenzy, he has his orgasm.

Exhausted, in a fond embrace, he says: “Gee, sorry. It took me a few
minutes to think of someone.”

I also recall him telling me that it used to bother Harlan Ellison, when
Sturgeon was living in his house in the late 1960s, that nudist Ted
would answer the door without any clothes on. Ted liked to tell Ellison
stories too.

He was known for singing and playing guitar at conventions in the 1950s.
I only heard him do so once in the 1970s, when he was out of practice,
but he was still good. I felt that way about his stories of the 1980s
too, still good, but not at the top of his form—although I have not
reread them in fifteen or more years now, and reserve the right to do so
and perhaps change my mind.

For most of the 1970s and 1980s, Paul Williams, Chip Delany, and I
became a Sturgeon admiration society. Each of us was always ready to
write about Sturgeon, recommend Sturgeon, discuss Surgeon, bring his
works to the attention of more readers. And he needed this, because for
a really bright and talented man, he was just terrible at making money.
I arranged to reprint some of his works in hardcover for the first time
in the Gregg Press series in the late 1970s, and commissioned
introductions from Chip and Paul. Paul helped put together new Sturgeon
collections for Dell in the 1970s, and later Blue Jay in the 1980s. Chip
Delany’s enormous prestige as a critic maintained and enhanced
Sturgeon’s reputation in years when no fiction was published and
powerful younger writers entered the limelight. You are fortunate to
hold in your hands a collection of Sturgeon stories from the 1950s, his
greatest decade as a writer. As far as I am concerned, his major works
of that decade were investigations and dramatizations of human
psychology, driven by a syzygy of idea and character. The two stories
that mean the most to me in this volume are “And Now the News …” and
“Affair with a Green Monkey.”

The first is not by any useful definition science fiction (but see Paul
Williams’s story notes at the end of the book for Sturgeon’s opinion),
though it did appear in _The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction_. It
is simply one of the finest American stories of the twentieth century.
It was written by a science fiction writer, and is a penetrating
prophecy of what was going to happen too often in the next four decades,
so often we now have a colloquial phrase involving the postal service
for a certain kind of insanity. I read it when the issue was published,
it worried me, and I tried to reject it for several years. I think back
to it frequently when the real world recapitulates it another time.

And (again see the story note) it was based on a core idea and detailed
plot given to Sturgeon by Robert A. Heinlein, also at the peak of his
reputation, who had been asked by Sturgeon to suggest ideas for stories.
Heinlein also said, “I must say that I am flattered at the request. To
have the incomparable and always scintillating Sturgeon ask for ideas is
like having the Pacific Ocean ask one to pee in it.” (The entire letter
was published in _The New York Review of Science Fiction_, #84, August
1995.) I get the idea from everyone I have spoken to over the years that
nearly every SF writer in those days considered Sturgeon in some way the
best. “Affair with a Green Monkey” is both horrifying and funny, sort of
like the joke I repeated above. It is also a clever and economical
psychological portrait. And it really is science fiction.

There are other fine stories here (particularly “The Other Celia” and
“The Skills of Xanadu”), and some only with fine moments, but all are
worth reading, if only because they are the work of the SF writer of the
1940s to the 1980s who was at the same time writing in genre and
successfully and consciously aspiring to art in his writing. He is one
of the primary models.

On later generations, after Bradbury (who was influenced by Sturgeon’s
stories in _Astounding_ and _Unknown_ between 1939 and 1944, not the
work of later decades), Sturgeon’s fiction of the 1950s is clearly
influential at the start of the careers of Samuel R. Delany and Roger
Zelazny in the 1960s. The intent was not only to entertain but also to
create art in fantasy and SF: the use of telling and carefully observed
detail to underpin characterization; a deep and complex understanding
of, and portrayal of, human psychology; not only a fearless portrayal of
sentiment, but—particularly in Delany—a fascination with love, sex,
gender roles; and a constantly surprising but consistent evocation of
cultures unlike our own—that then reflect back upon our own in pleasant
or disturbing ways. This is the core of what I meant above when I
referred to a syzygy, a complete blending, of idea and character as the
driving force of his fiction.

If Sturgeon’s influence had only extended this far, it would have been
crucial to the evolution of contemporary SF, horror, and fantasy. But it
extends much farther. There are more volumes in this series to come,
including more of his very best.



“WON’T YOU WALK …?”


JOE FRITCH WALKED under the moon, and behind the bridge of his nose
something rose and stung him. When he was a little boy, which was better
than thirty years ago, this exact sensation was the prelude to tears.
There had been no tears for a long time, but the sting came to him, on
its occasions, quite unchanged. There was another goad to plague him
too, as demanding and insistent as the sting, but at the moment it was
absent. They were mutually exclusive.

His mind was a jumble of half-curses, half-wishes, not weak or pale ones
by any means, but just unfinished. He need not finish them, any of them;
his curses and his wishes were his personal clichés, and required only a
code, a syllable for each. “He who hesitates—” people say, and that’s
enough. “Too many cooks—” they say wisely. “What’s sauce for the
goose—.” Valid sagacities, every one, classic as the Parthenon and as
widely known.

Such were the damnations and the prayers in the microcosm called Joe
Fritch. “Oh, I wish—” he would say to himself, and “If only—” and “Some
day, by God—”; and for each of these there was a wish, detailed and
dramatic, so thought-out, touched-up, policed and maintained that it had
everything but reality to make it real. And in the other area, the
curses, the code words expressed wide meticulous matrices: “That
Barnes—” dealt not only with his employer, a snide, selfish, sarcastic
sadist with a presence like itching powder, but with every social
circumstance which produced and permitted a way of life wherein a man
like Joe Fritch could work for a man like Barnes. “Lutie—” was his
wife’s name, but as a code word it was dowdy breakfasts and
“I-can’t-afford” and the finger in her ear, the hand beginning to waggle
rapidly when she was annoyed; “Lutie—” said as the overture to this
massive curse was that which was wanted and lost _(“Joe?” “What, li’l
Lutie?” “Nothing, Joe. Just … Joe—”)_ and that which was unwanted and
owned, like the mortgage which would be paid off in only eighteen more
years, and the single setting of expensive flowery sterling which they
would never, never be able to add to.

Something had happened after dinner—he could almost not remember it now;
what bursts the balloon, the last puff of air, or the air it already
contains? Is the final drop the only factor in the spillingover of a
brimming glass? Something about Marie Next Door (Lutie always spoke of
her that way, a name like William Jennings Bryan) and a new TV console,
and something about Lutie’s chances, ten years ago, of marrying no end
of TV consoles, with houses free-and-clear and a car and a coat, and all
these chances forsworn for the likes of Joe Fritch. It had been an
evening like other evenings, through 10:13 P.M. At 10:14 something
silent and scalding had burst in the back of Joe’s throat; he had risen
without haste and had left the house. Another man might have roared an
epithet, hurled an ashtray. Some might have slammed the door, and some,
more skilled in maliciousness, might have left it open so the angry
wife, sooner or later, might get up and close it. Joe had simply
shambled out, shrinking away from her in the mindless way an amoeba
avoids a hot pin. There were things he might have said. There were
things he could have said to Barnes, too, time and time again, and to
the elevator starter who caught him by the elbow one morning and jammed
him into a car, laughing at him through the gate before the doors slid
shut. But he never said the things, not to anyone. Why not? Why not?

“They wouldn’t listen,” he said aloud, and again the sting came back of
his nose.

He stopped, and heeled water out of his left eye with the base of his
thumb. This, and the sound of his own voice, brought him his lost sense
of presence. He looked around like a child awakening in a strange bed.

It was a curved and sloping street, quite unlike the angled
regimentation of his neighborhood. There was a huge elm arched over the
streetlamp a block away, and to Joe’s disoriented eye it looked like a
photographic negative, a shadow-tree lit by darkness looming over a
shadow of light. A tailored hedge grew on a neat stone wall beside him;
across the street was a white picket fence enclosing a rolling acre and
the dark mass of just the house he could never own, belonging, no doubt,
to someone people listened to. Bitterly he looked at it and its two
gates, its rolled white driveway, and, inevitably, the low, long coupé
which stood in it. The shape of that car, the compact, obedient,
directional eagerness of it, came to him like the welcome answer to some
deep question within him, something he had thought too complex to have
any solution. For a moment a pure, bright vision overwhelmed and exalted
him; his heart, his very bones cried _well, of course!_ and he crossed
to the driveway, along its quiet grassy margin to the car.

He laid a hand on its cool ivory flank, and had his vision again. At the
wheel of this fleet-footed dream car, he would meet the morning
somewhere far from here. There would be a high hill, and a white road
winding up it, and over the brow of that hill, there would be the sea.
Below, a beach, and rocks; and there would be people. Up the hill he
would hurtle, through and over a stone wall at the top, and in the
moment he was airborne, he would blow the horn. Louder, _bigger_ than
the horn would be his one bright burst of laughter. He had never laughed
like that, but he would, he could, for all of him would be in it,
rejoicing that they listened to him, they’d all be listening, up and
down the beach and craning over the cliff. After that he’d fall, but
that didn’t matter. Nothing would matter, even the fact that his act was
criminal and childish. All the “If only—” and “Some day, by God—”
wishes, all the “That Barnes—” curses, for all their detail, lacked
implementation. But this one, this one—

The window was open on the driver’s side. Joe looked around; the street
was deserted and the house was dark. He bent and slid his hand along the
line of the dimly glowing phosphorescence that was a dashboard.
Something tinkled, dangled—the keys, the keys!

He opened the door, got in. He could feel the shift in balance as the
splendid machine accepted him like a lover, and they were one together.
He pulled the door all but closed, checked it, then pressed it the rest
of the way. It closed with a quiet, solid click. Joe grasped the
steering wheel in both hands, settled himself, and quelled just the
great trumpeting of laughter he had envisioned. _Later, later_. He
reached for the key, turned it.

There was a soft purring deep under the hood. The window at his left
slid up, nudging his elbow out of the way, seating itself in the molding
above. The purring stopped. Then silence.

Joe grunted in surprise and turned the key again. Nothing. He fumbled
along the dashboard, over the cowling, under its edge. He moved his feet
around. Accelerator, brake. No clutch. A headlight dimmer switch. With
less and less caution he pushed, turned and pulled at the controls on
the instrument panel. No lights came on. The radio did not work. Neither
did the cigarette lighter, which startled him when it came out in his
hand. There wasn’t a starter anywhere.

Joe Fritch, who couldn’t weep, very nearly did then. If a man had a car
burglar-proofed with some sort of concealed switch, wasn’t that enough?
Why did he have to amuse himself by leaving the keys in it? Even Barnes
never thought of anything quite that sadistic.

For a split second he glanced forlornly at his glorious vision, then
forever let it go. Once he sniffed; then he put his hand on the door
control and half rose in his seat.

The handle spun easily, uselessly around. Joe stopped it, pulled it
upward. It spun just as easily that way. He tried pulling it toward him,
pushing it outward. Nothing.

He bit his lower lip and dove for the other door. It had exactly the
same kind of handle, which behaved exactly the same way. Suddenly Joe
was panting as if from running hard.

Now take it easy. Don’t try to do anything. Think. Think, Joe.

The windows!

On his door there were two buttons; on the other, one. He tried them
all. “I can’t get out,” he whispered. “I can’t—” Suddenly he spun one of
the door handles. He fluttered his hands helplessly and looked out into
the welcome, open dark. _“Can’t!”_ he cried.

“That’s right,” said a voice. “You sure can’t.” The sting at the base of
Joe Fritch’s nose—that was one of the unexpressed, inexpressible pains
which had plagued him ever since he was a boy. Now came the other.

It was a ball of ice, big as a fist, in his solar plexus; and around
this ball stretched a membrane; and the ball was fury, and the membrane
was fear. The more terrified he became, the tighter the membrane shrank
and the more it hurt. If ever he were frightened beyond bearing, the
membrane would break and let the fury out, and that must not, must not
happen, for the fury was so cold and so uncaring of consequence. This
was no churning confusion—there was nothing confused about it. There was
only compression and stretching and a breaking point so near it could be
felt in advance. There was nothing that could be done about it except to
sit quite still and wait until it went away, which it did when whatever
caused it went away.

This voice, though, here in the car with him, it didn’t go away.
Conversationally, it said, “Were you thinking of breaking the glass?”

Joe just sat. The voice said, “Look in the glove compartment.” It waited
five seconds, and said, “Go ahead. Look in the glove compartment.”

Trembling, Joe reached over and fumbled the catch of the glove
compartment. He felt around inside. It seemed empty, and then something
moved under his fingers. It was a rectangle of wood, about six inches by
three, extremely light and soft. Balsa. “I used to use a real piece of
glass as a sample,” said the voice, “but one of you fools got to bashing
it around and broke two of his own fingers. Anyway, that piece of wood
is exactly as thick as the windshield and windows.” It was nearly three
quarters of an inch think. “Bulletproof is an understatement. Which
reminds me,” said the voice, stifling a yawn, “if you have a gun, for
Pete’s sake don’t use it. The slug’ll ricochet. Did you ever see the
wound a ricocheted bullet makes?” The yawn again. “S’cuse me. You woke
me up.”

Joe licked his lips, which made him shudder. The tongue and lip were so
dry they scraped all but audibly. “Where are you?” he whispered.

“In the house. I always take that question as a compliment. You’re
hearing me on the car radio. Clean, hm-m-m? Flat to twenty-seven
thousand cycles. Designed it myself.”

Joe said, “Let me out.”

“I’ll let you out, but I won’t let you go. You people are my bread and
butter.”

“Listen,” said Joe, “I’m not a thief, or a … or a … or anything. I mean,
this was just a sort of wild idea. Just let me go, huh? I won’t
_ever_ … I mean, I promise.” He scraped at his lip with his tongue again
and added, “Please, I mean, please.”

“Where were you going with my car, Mister I’m-not-a-thief?”

Joe was silent.

A sudden blaze of light made him wince. His eyes adjusted, and he found
it was only the light over the porte-cochere which bridged the driveway
where it passed the house. “Come on inside,” said the voice warmly.

Joe looked across the rolling lawn at the light. The car was parked in
the drive near the street; the house was nearly two hundred feet away.
_Catch ten times as many with it parked way out here_, he thought
wildly. And, _I thought Barnes was good at making people squirm_. And,
_Two hundred feet, and him in the house. He can outthink me; could he
outrun me?_ “What do you want me inside for?”

“Would it make any difference how I answered that question?”

Joe saw that it wouldn’t. The voice was calling the shots now, and Joe
was hardly in the position to make any demands. Resignedly he asked,
“You’re going to call the police?”

“Absolutely not.”

A wave of relief was overtaken and drowned in a flood of terror. No one
knew where he was. No one had seen him get into the car. Being arrested
would be unpleasant, but at least it would be a known kind of
unpleasantness. But what lay in store for him in this mysterious
expensive house?

“You better just call the police,” he said. “I mean, have me arrested.
I’ll wait where I am.”

“No,” said the voice. It carried a new tone, and only by the change did
Joe realize how—how _kind_ it had been before. Joe believed that single
syllable completely. Again he eyed the two hundred feet. He tensed
himself, and said, “All right. I’ll come.”

“Good boy,” said the voice, kind again. “Sleep sweet.” Something went
_pfffft!_ on the dashboard and Joe’s head was enveloped in a fine, very
cold mist. He fell forward and hit his mouth on the big V emblem in the
hub of the steering wheel. A profound astonishment enveloped him because
he felt the impact but no pain.

He blacked out.

There was a comfortable forever during which he lay in a dim place,
talking lazily, on and on. Something questioned him from time to time,
and perhaps he knew he was not questioning himself; he certainly didn’t
care. He rested in an euphoric cloud, calmly relating things he thought
he had forgotten, and while an objective corner of his mind continued to
operate, to look around, to feel and judge and report, it was almost
completely preoccupied with an astonished delight that he could talk
about his job, his marriage, his sister Anna, even about Joey—whom he’d
killed when he and Joey were ten years old—without either the
self-pitying twinge of unshed tears nor the painful fear which contained
his rage.

Someone moved into his range of vision, someone with a stranger’s face
and a manner somehow familiar. He had something shiny in his hand. He
advanced and bent over him, and Joe felt the nip of a needle in his
upper arm. He lay quietly then, not talking because he had finished what
he had to say, not moving because he was so comfortable, and began to
feel warm from the inside out. That lasted for another immeasurable
time. Then he detected movement again, and was drawn to it; the stranger
crossed in front of him and sat down in an easy chair. Their faces were
about at the same level, but Joe was not on an easy chair. Neither was
it a couch. It was something in between. He glanced down and saw his
knees, his feet. He was in one of those clumsy-looking superbly
comfortable devices known as a contour chair. He half-sat, half-reclined
in it, looked at the other man and felt just wonderful. He smiled
sleepily, and the man smiled back.

The man looked too old to be thirty, though he might be. He looked too
young for fifty, though that was possible, too. His hair was dark, his
eyebrows flecked with gray—a combination Joe thought he had never seen
before. His eyes were light—in this dim room it was hard to see their
color. The nose was ridiculous: it belonged to a happy fat man, and not
someone with a face as long and lean as this one. The mouth was large
and flexible; it was exactly what is meant by the term “generous,” yet
its lips were thin, the upper one almost non-existent. He seemed of
average height, say five, ten or eleven, but he gave the impression of
being somehow too wide and too flat. Joe looked at him and at his smile,
and it flashed across his mind that the French call a smile _sourire_,
which means literally “under a laugh”; and surely, in any absolute scale
of merriment, this smile was just exactly that. “How are you feeling?”

“I feel fine,” said Joe. He really meant it.

“I’m Zeitgeist,” said the man.

Joe was unquestioningly aware that the man knew him, knew all about him,
so he didn’t offer his name in return. He accepted the introduction and
after a moment let his eyes stray from the friendly face to the wall
behind him, to some sort of framed document, around to the side where a
massive bookcase stood. He suddenly realized that he was in a strange
room. He snapped his gaze back to the man. “Where am I?”

“In my house,” said Zeitgeist. He uncrossed his legs and leaned forward.
“I’m the man whose car you were stealing. Remember?”

Joe did, with a rush. An echo of his painful panic struck him, made him
leap to his feet, a reflex which utterly failed. Something caught him
gently and firmly around the midriff and slammed him back into the
contour chair. He looked down and saw a piece of webbing like that used
in aircraft safety belts, but twice as wide. It was around his waist and
had no buckle; or if it had, it was behind and under the back of the
chair, well out of his reach.

“It’s O.K.,” Zeitgeist soothed him. “You didn’t actually steal it, and I
understand perfectly why you tried. Let’s just forget that part of it.”

“Who are you? What are you trying to do? Let me out of this thing!” The
memory of this man approaching him with a glittering hypodermic returned
to him. “What did you do, drug me?”

Zeitgeist crossed his legs again and leaned back. “Yes, several times,
and the nicest part of it is that you can’t stay that excited very long
just now.” He smiled again, warm.

Joe heaved again against the webbing, lay back, opened his mouth to
protest, closed it helplessly. Then he met the man’s eyes again, and he
could feel the indignation and fright draining out of him. He suddenly
felt foolish, and found a smile of his own, a timid, foolish one.

“First I anaesthetized you,” said Zeitgeist informatively, apparently
pursuing exactly the line of thought brought out by Joe’s question,
“because not for a second would I trust any of you to come across that
lawn just because I asked you to. Then I filled you full of what we’d
call truth serum if this was a TV play. And when you’d talked enough I
gave you another shot to pull you out of it. Yes, I drugged you.”

“What for? What do you want from me, anyway?”

“You’ll find out when you get my bill.”

“Bill?”

“Sure. I have to make a living just like anybody else.”

“Bill for what?”

“I’m going to fix you up.”

“There’s nothing the matter with me!”

Zeitgeist twitched his mobile lips. “Nothing wrong with a man who wants
to take an expensive automobile and kill himself with it?”

Joe dropped his eyes. A little less pugnaciously, he demanded, “What are
you, a psychiatrist or something?”

“Or something,” laughed Zeitgeist. “Now listen to me,” he said easily.
“There are classic explanations for people doing the things they do, and
you have a textbook full. You were an undersized kid who lost his mother
early. You were brutalized by a big sister who just wouldn’t be a mother
to you. When you were ten you threw one of your tantrums and crowded
another kid, and he slipped on the ice and was hit by a truck and
killed. Your sister lambasted you for it until you ran away from home
nine years later. You got married and didn’t know how to put your wife
into the mother-image, so you treated her like your sister Anna instead;
you obeyed, you didn’t answer back, you did as little as possible to
make her happy because no matter how happy she got you were still
subconsciously convinced it would do you no good. And by the way, the
kid who was killed had the same name as you did.” He smiled his kindly
smile, wagged his head and _tsk-tsked_. “You should see what the
textbooks say about that kind of thing. Identification: you are the Joey
who was killed when you got mad and hit him. Ergo, don’t ever let
yourself get mad or you’ll be dead. Joe Fritch, you know what you are?
You’re a mess.”

“What am I supposed to say?” asked Joe in a low voice. Had he run off at
the mouth that much? He was utterly disarmed. In the face of such
penetrating revelation, anger would be ridiculous.

“Don’t say anything. That is, don’t try to explain—I already understand.
How’d you like to get rid of all that garbage? I can do that for you.
Will you let me?”

“Why should you?”

“I’ve already told you. It’s my living.”

“You say you’re a psychiatrist?”

“I said nothing of the kind, and that’s beside the point. Well?”

“Well, O.K. I mean … O.K.”

Zeitgeist rose, smiling, and stepped behind Joe. There was a metallic
click and the webbing loosened. Joe looked up at his host, thinking:
_Suppose I won’t? Suppose I just don’t? What could he do?_

“There are lots of things I could do,” said Zeitgeist with gentle
cheerfulness. “Full of tricks, I am.”

In spite of himself, Joe laughed. He got up. Zeitgeist steadied him,
then released his elbow. Joe said, “Thanks … what are you, I mean, a
mind reader?”

“I don’t have to be.”

Joe thought about it. “I guess you don’t,” he said.

“Come on.” Zeitgeist turned away to the door. Joe reflected that anyone
who would turn his back on a prisoner like that was more than just
confident—he must have a secret weapon. _But at the moment confidence is
enough_. He followed Zeitgeist into the next room.

It, too, was a low room, but much wider than the other, and its dimness
was of quite another kind. Pools of brilliance from floating
fluorescents mounted over three different laboratory benches made them
like three islands in a dark sea. At about eye-level—as he stood—in the
shadows over one of the benches, the bright green worm of a cathode-ray
oscilloscope writhed in its twelve-inch circular prison. Ranked along
the walls were instrument racks and consoles; he was sure he could not
have named one in ten of them in broad daylight. The room was almost
silent, but it was a living silence of almost undetectable clickings and
hummings and the charged, noiseless _presence_ of power. It was a
waiting, busy sort of room.

“Boo,” said Zeitgeist.

“I beg your … huh?”

Zeitgeist laughed. “You say it.” He pointed. “Boooo.”

Joe looked up at the oscilloscope. The worm had changed to a wiggling,
scraggly child’s scrawl, which, when Zeitgeist’s long-drawn syllable was
finished, changed into a green worm again. Zeitgeist touched a control
knob on one of the benches and the worm became a straight line. “Go
ahead.”

“Boo,” said Joe self-consciously. The line was a squiggle and then a
line again. “Come on, a good loud long one,” said Zeitgeist. This time
Joe produced the same sort of “grass” the other man had. Or at least, it
looked the same. “Good,” said Zeitgeist. “What do you do for a living?”

“Advertising. You mean I didn’t tell you?”

“You were more interested in talking about your boss than your work.
What kind of advertising?”

“Well, I mean, it isn’t advertising like in an agency. I mean, I work
for the advertising section of the public relations division of a big
corporation.”

“You write ads? Sell them? Art, production, research—what?”

“All that. I mean, a little of all those. We’re not very big. The
company is, I mean, but not our office. We only advertise in trade
magazines. The engineer’ll come to me with something he wants to promote
and I check with the … I mean, that Barnes, and if he OKs it I write
copy on it and check back with the engineer and write it again and check
back with Barnes and write it again; and after that I do the layout, I
mean I draft the layout just on a piece of typewriter paper, that’s all,
I can’t draw or anything like that, I mean; and then I see it through
Art and go back and check with Barnes, and then I order space for it in
the magazine and—”

“You ever take a vocational analysis?”

“Yes, I mean, sure I did. I’m in the right sort of job, according to the
test. I mean, it was the Kline-Western test.”

“Good test,” said Zeitgeist approvingly.

“You think I’m not in the right sort of job?” He paused, and then with
sudden animation, “You think I should quit that lousy job, I mean, get
into something else?”

“That’s your business. All right, that’s enough.”

The man could be as impersonal as a sixpenny nail when he wanted to be.
He worked absorbedly at his controls for a while. There was a soft whine
from one piece of apparatus, a clicking from another, and before Joe
knew what was happening he heard someone saying, “All that. I mean, a
little of all those. We’re not very big. The company is, I mean, but not
our office. We only advertise—” on and on, in his exact words. His exact
voice, too, he realized belatedly. He listened to it without enthusiasm.
From time to time a light blazed, bright as a photoflash but scalding
red. Patiently, brilliantly, the oscilloscope traced each syllable, each
pulse within each syllable. “… and check with Barnes, and then I order
sp—” The voice ceased abruptly as Zeitgeist threw a switch.

“I didn’t know you were recording,” said Joe, “or I would have … I mean,
said something different maybe.”

“I know,” said Zeitgeist. “That red light bother you?”

“It was pretty bright,” said Joe, not wanting to complain.

“Look here.” He opened the top of the recorder. Joe saw reels and more
heads that he had ever seen on a recorder before, and a number of other
unfamiliar components. “I don’t know much about—”

“You don’t have to,” said Zeitgeist. “See there?” He pointed with one
hand, and with the other reached for a button on the bench and pressed
it. A little metal arm snapped up against the tape just where it passed
over an idler. “That punched a little hole in the tape. Not enough to
affect the recording.” Zeitgeist turned the reel slowly by hand, moving
the tape along an inch or so. Joe saw, on the moving tape, a tiny bright
spot of light. When the almost invisible hold moved into it, the red
light flared. “I pushed that button every time you said ‘I mean.’ Let’s
play it again.”

He played it again, and Joe listened—an act of courage, because with all
his heart he wanted to cover his ears, shut his eyes against that red
blaze. He was consumed with embarrassment. He had never heard anything
that sounded so completely idiotic. When at last it was over, Zeitgeist
grinned at him. “Learn something?”

“I did,” said Joe devoutly.

“O.K.,” said Zeitgeist, in a tone which disposed of the matter
completely as far as he was concerned, at the same time acting as
prelude to something new. The man’s expressiveness was extraordinary;
with a single word he had Joe’s gratitude and his fullest attention.
“Now listen to this.” He made some adjustments, threw a switch. Joe’s
taped voice said, “… go back and check it with Ba-a-a-a-a-ah—” with the
“ah” going on and on like an all-clear signal. “That bother you?” called
Zeitgeist over the noise.

“It’s awful!” shouted Joe. This time he did cover his ears. It didn’t
help. Zeitgeist switched off the noise and laughed at him. “That’s
understandable. Your own voice, and it goes on and on like that. What’s
bothering you is, it doesn’t breathe. I swear you could choke a man half
to death, just by making him listen to that. Well, don’t let it worry
you. That thing over there”—he pointed to a massive cabinet against the
wall—“is my analyzer. It breaks up your voice into all the tones and
overtones it contains, finds out the energy level of each, and shoots
the information to that tone-generator yonder. The generator reproduces
each component exactly as received, through seventy-two band-pass
filters two hundred cycles apart. All of which means that when I tell it
to, it picks out a single vowel sound—in this case your ‘a’ in
‘Barnes’—and hangs it up there on the ’scope like a photograph for as
long as I want to look at it.”

“All that, to do what I do when I say ‘ah?’ ”

“All that,” beamed Zeitgeist. Joe could see he was unashamedly proud of
his equipment. He leaned forward and flicked Joe across the Adam’s
apple. “That’s a hell of a compact little machine, that pharynx of
yours. Just look at that wave-form.”

Joe looked at the screen. “Some mess.”

“A little tomato sauce and you could serve it in an Italian restaurant,”
said Zeitgeist. “Now let’s take it apart.”

From another bench he carried the cable of a large control box, and
plugged it into the analyzer with a many-pronged jack. The box had on it
nearly a hundred keys. He fingered a control at the end of each row and
the oscilloscope subsided to its single straight line. “Each one of
these keys controls one of those narrow two-hundred-cycle bands I was
talking about,” he told Joe. “Your voice—everybody’s voice—has high and
low overtones, some loud, some soft. Here’s one at the top, one in the
middle, one at the bottom.” He pressed three widely separated keys. The
speaker uttered a faint breathy note, than a flat tone, the same in
pitch but totally different in quality; it was a little like hearing the
same note played first on a piccolo and then on a viola. The third key
produced only a murmuring hiss, hardly louder that the noise of the
amplifier itself. With each note, the ’scope showed a single wavy line.
With the high it was a steep but even squiggle. In the middle it was a
series of shallow waves like a child’s drawing of an ocean. Down at the
bottom it just shook itself and lay there.

“Just what I thought. I’m not saying you’re a soprano, Joe, but there’s
five times more energy in your high register than there is at the
bottom. Ever hear the way a kid’s voice climbs the scale when he’s
upset—whining, crying, demanding? ’Spose I told you that all the protest
against life that you’re afraid to express in anger, is showing up
here?” He slid his fingers across the entire upper register, and the
speaker blasted. “Listen to that, the poor little feller.”

In abysmal self-hatred, Joe felt the sting of tears. “Cut it out,” he
blurted.

“Caht eet ow-oot,” mimicked Zeitgeist. Joe thought he’d kill him, then
and there, but couldn’t because he found himself laughing. The imitation
was very good. “You know, Joe, the one thing you kept droning on about
in the other room was something about ‘they won’t listen to me. Nobody
will listen.’ How many times, say, in the office, have you had a really
solid idea and kept it to yourself because ‘nobody will listen?” How
many times have you wanted to do something with your wife, go somewhere,
ask her to get something from the cleaners—and then decided not to
because she wouldn’t listen?” He glanced around at Joe, and charitably
turned away from the contorted face. “Don’t answer that: you know, and
it doesn’t matter to me.

“Now get this, Joe. There’s something in all animals just about as basic
as hunger. It’s the urge to attack something that’s retreating, and its
converse: to be wary of something that won’t retreat. Next time a dog
comes running up to you, growling, with his ears laid back, turn and run
and see if he doesn’t take a flank steak out of your southern
hemisphere. After you get out of the hospital, go back and when he
rushes you, laugh at him and keep going on about your business, and see
him decide you’re not on his calorie chart for the day. Well, the same
thing works with people. No one’s going to attack you unless he has you
figured out—especially if he figures you’ll retreat. Walk around with a
big neon sign on your head that says ‘HEY EVERYBODY I WILL RETREAT,’ and
you’re just going to get clobbered wherever you go. You’ve got a sign
like that and it lights up every time you open your mouth. Caht eet
owoot.”

Joe’s lower lip protruded childishly. “I can’t help what kind of voice
I’ve got.”

“Probably you can’t. I can, though.”

“But how—”

“Shut up.” Zeitgeist returned all the keys to a neutral position and
listened a moment to the blaring audio. Then he switched it off and
began flicking keys, some up, some down. “Mind you, this isn’t a matter
of changing a tenor into a baritone. New York City once had a mayor with
a voice like a Punch and Judy show, and he hadn’t an ounce of retreat in
him. All I’m going to do is cure a symptom. Some people say that doesn’t
work, but ask the gimpy guy who finds himself three inches taller and
walking like other people, the first time he tries his built-up shoes.
As the guy who wears a well-made toupee.” He stared for a while at the
’scope, and moved some more keys. “You want people to listen to you. All
right, they will, whether they want to or not. Of course, _what_ they
listen to is something else again. It better be something that backs up
this voice I’m giving you. That’s up to you.”

“I don’t under—”

“You’ll understand a lot quicker if we fix it so you listen and I talk.
O.K.?” Zeitgeist demanded truculently, and sent over such an engaging
grin that the words did not smart. “Now, like I said, I’m only curing a
symptom. What you have to get through your thick head is that the
disease doesn’t exist. All that stuff about your sister Anna, and Joey,
that doesn’t exist because it happened and it’s finished and it’s years
ago and it doesn’t matter any more. Lutie, Barnes … well, they bother
you mostly because they won’t listen to you. _They’ll listen to you
now_. So that botherment is over with, too; finished, done with,
nonexistent. For all practical purposes yesterday is as far beyond
recall as twenty years ago; just as finished, just as dead. So the
little boy who got punished by his big sister until he thought he
deserved being punished_—he_ doesn’t exist. The man with the guilty
feeling killing a kid called Joey, he doesn’t exist either any more, and
by the way he wasn’t guilty in the first place. The copy man who lets a
pipsqueak sadist prick him with petty sarcasms—he’s gone too, because
now there’s a man who won’t swallow what he wants to say, what he knows
is right. He’ll say it, just because _people will listen_. A beer stein
is pretty useless to anyone until you put beer in it. The gadget I’m
going to give you won’t do you a bit of good unless you put yourself,
your real self into it.” He had finished with the keys while he spoke,
had turned and was holding Joe absolutely paralyzed with his strange
light eyes.

Inanely, Joe said, “G-gadget?”

“Listen.” Zeitgeist hit the master switch and Joe’s voice came from the
speaker. “We only advertise in trade magazines. The engineer’ll come to
me with something he wants to promote and—”

And the voice was his voice, but it was something else, too. Its pitch
was the same, inflection, accent; but there was a forceful resonance in
it somewhere, somehow. It was a compelling voice, a rich voice; above
all it was assertive and sure. (And when the ‘I means’ came, and the
scalding light flashed, it wasn’t laughable or embarrassing; it was
simply unnecessary.)

“That isn’t me.”

“You’re quite right. It isn’t. But it’s the way the world will hear you.
It’s behind the way the world will treat you. And the way the world
treats a man is the way the man grows, if he wants to and he’s got any
growing left in him. Whatever is in that voice you can _be_ because I
will help and the world will help. But you’ve got to help, too.”

“I’ll help,” Joe whispered.

“Sometimes I make speeches,” said Zeitgeist, and grinned shyly. The next
second he was deeply immersed in work.

He drew out a piece of paper with mimeographed rulings on it, and here
and there in the ruled squares he jotted down symbols, referring to the
keyboard in front of him. He seemed then to be totaling columns; once he
reset two or three keys, turned on the audio and listened intently, then
erased figures and put down others. At last he nodded approvingly, rose,
stretched till his spine cracked, picked up the paper and went over to
the third bench.

From drawers and cubbyholes he withdrew components—springs, pads, plugs,
rods. He moved with precision and swift familiarity. He rolled out what
looked like a file drawer, but instead of papers it contained ranks and
rows of black plastic elements, about the size and shape of miniature
match boxes, each with two bright brass contacts at top and bottom.

“We’re living in a wonderful age, Joe,” said Zeitgeist as he worked.
“Before long I’ll turn the old soldering iron out to stud and let it
father waffles. Printed circuits, sub-mini tubes, transistors. These
things here are electrets, which I won’t attempt to explain to you.” He
bolted and clipped, bent and formed, and every once in a while,
referring to his list, he selected another of the black boxes from the
file and added it to his project. When there were four rows of
components, each row about one and a half by six inches, he made some
connections with test clips and thrust a jack into a receptacle in the
bench. He glanced up at the ’scope, grunted, unclipped one of the black
rectangles and substituted another from the files.

“These days, Joe, when they can pack a whole radar set—transmitter,
receiver, timing and arming mechanisms and a power supply into the nose
of a shell, a package no bigger than your fist—these days you can do
anything with a machine. Anything, Joe. You just have to figure out how.
Most of the parts exist, they make ’em in job lots. You just have to
plug ’em together.” He plugged in the jack, as if to demonstrate, and
glanced up at the ’scope. “Good. The rest won’t take long.” Working with
tin-snips, then with a small sheet-metal brake, he said, “Some day
you’re going to ask me what I’m doing, what all this is for, and I’ll
just grin at you. I’m going to tell you now and if you don’t remember
what I say, well, then forget it.

“They say our technology has surpassed, or bypassed, our souls, Joe.
They say if we don’t turn from science to the spirit, we’re doomed. I
agree that we’re uncomfortably close to damnation, but I don’t think
we’ll appease any great powers by throwing our gears and gimmicks over
the cliffs as a sacrifice, a propitiation. Science didn’t get us into
this mess; we _used_ science to get us in.

“So I’m just a guy who’s convinced we can use science to get us out. In
other words, I’m not for hanging the gunsmith every time someone gets
shot. Take off your shirt.”

“What?” said Joe, back from a thousand miles. “Oh.” Bemused, he took off
his jacket and shirt and stood shyly clutching his thin ribs.

Zeitgeist picked up his project from the bench and put it over Joe’s
head. A flat band of spring steel passed over each shoulder, snugly. The
four long flat casings, each filled with components, rested against his
collarbones, pressing upward in the small hollow just below the bones,
and against his shoulder blades. Zeitgeist bent and manipulated the
bands until they were tight but comfortable. Then he hooked the back
pieces to the front pieces with soft strong elastic bands passed under
Joe’s arms. “O.K.? O.K. Now—say something.”

“Say what?” said Joe stupidly, and immediately clapped his hand to his
chest. _“Uh!”_

“What happened?”

“It … I mean, it buzzed.”

Zeitgeist laughed. “Let me tell you what you’ve got there. In front, two
little speakers, an amplifier to drive them, and a contact microphone
that picks up your chest tones. In back, on this side, a band-pass
arrangement that suppresses all those dominating high-frequency
whimperings of yours and feeds the rest, the stuff you’re weak in, up
front to be amplified. And over here, in back—that’s where the power
supply goes. Go over there where you were and record something. And
remember what I told you—you have to help this thing. Talk a little
slower and you won’t have to say ‘I mean’ while you think of what comes
next. You _know_ what comes next, anyway. You don’t have to be afraid to
say it.”

Dazed, Joe stepped back to where he had been when the first recording
was made, glanced for help up at the green line of the oscilloscope,
closed his eyes and said, falteringly at first, then stronger and
steadier, “ ‘Four score and seven years ago, our fathers brought forth
upon this contin—’ ”

“Cut!” cried Zeitgeist. “Joe, see that tone-generator over there? It’s
big as a spinet piano. I can do a lot but believe me, you haven’t got
one of those strapped on you. Your amplifier can only blow up what it
gets. You don’t have much, but for Pete’s sake give it what you have.
Try talking with your lungs full instead of empty. Push your voice a
little, don’t just let it fall out of you.”

“Nothing happens, though. I sound the same to myself. Is it working?
Maybe it doesn’t work.”

“Like I told you before,” said Zeitgeist with exaggerated patience,
“people who are talking aren’t listening. It’s working all right. Don’t
go looking for failures, Joe. Plenty’ll come along that you didn’t ask
for. Now go ahead and do as I said.”

Joe wet his lips, took a deep breath. Zeitgeist barked, “Now slowly!”
and he began: “ ‘Four score and seven years—’ ” The sonorous words
rolled out, his chest vibrated from the buzzing, synchronized to his
syllables. And though he was almost totally immersed in his performance,
a part of him leaped excitedly, realizing that never in his whole life
before had he listened, really listened to that majestic language. When
he was finished he opened his eyes and found Zeitgeist standing very
near him, his eyes alight.

“Good,” the man breathed. “Ah, but … good.”

“Was it? Was it really?”

In answer, Zeitgeist went to the controls, rewound the tape, and hit the
playback button.

And afterwards, he said gently to Joe, “You _can_ cry—see?”

“Damn foolishness,” said Joe.

“No it isn’t,” Zeitgeist told him.

Outside, it was morning—what a morning, with all the gold and green,
thrust and rustle of a new morning in a new summer. He hadn’t been out
all night; he had died and was born again! He stood tall, walked tall,
he carried his shining new voice sheathed like Excalibur, but for all
its concealment, he was armed!

He had tried to thank Zeitgeist, and that strange man had shaken his
head soberly and said, “Don’t, Joe. You’re going to pay me for it.”

“Well I will, of course I will! Anything you say … how much, anyhow?”

Zeitgeist had shaken his head slightly. “We’ll talk about it later. Go
on—get in the car. I’ll drive you to work.” And, silently, he had.

Downtown, he reached across Joe and opened the door. For him, the door
worked. “Come see me day after tomorrow. After dinner—nine.”

“O.K. Why? Got another … treatment?”

“Not for you,” said Zeitgeist, and his smile made it a fine compliment
for both of them. “But no power plant lasts forever. Luck.” And before
Joe could answer the door was closed and the big car had swung out into
traffic. Joe watched it go, grinning and shaking his head.

The corner clock said five minutes to nine. Just time, if he hurried.

He didn’t hurry. He went to Harry’s and got shaved, while they pressed
his suit and sponged his collar in the back room. He kept the bathrobe
they gave him pulled snugly over his amplifier, and under a hot towel he
reached almost the euphoric state he had been in last night. He thought
of Barnes, and the anger stirred in him. With some new internal motion
he peeled away its skin of fear and set it free. Nothing happened,
except that it lived in him instead of just lying there. It didn’t make
him tremble. It made him smile.

Clean, pressed, and smelling sweet, he walked into his building at eight
minutes before ten. He went down to the express elevator and stepped
into the one open door. Then he said, “Wait,” and stepped out again. The
operator goggled at him.

Joe walked up to the starter, a bushy character in faded brown and
raveled gold braid. “Hey … you.”

The starter pursed a pair of liver-colored lips and glowered at him.
“Whaddayeh want?”

Joe filled his lungs and said evenly, “Day before yesterday you took
hold of me and shoved me into an elevator like I was a burlap sack.”

The starter’s eyes flickered, “Not me.”

“You calling me a liar, too?”

Suddenly the man’s defenses caved. There was a swift pucker which came
and went on his chin, and he said, “Look, I got a job to do, mister,
rush hours, if I don’t get these cars out of here it’s _my_ neck, I
didn’t mean nothing by it, I——”

“Don’t tell me your troubles,” said Joe. He glared at the man for a
second. “All right, do your job, but don’t do it on me like that again.”

He turned his back, knowing he was mimicking Zeitgeist with the gesture
and enjoying the knowledge. He went back to the elevator and got in.
Through the closing gate he saw the starter, right where he had left
him, gaping. The kid running the elevator was gaping, too.

“Eleven,” said Joe.

“Yes, _sir_,” said the boy. He started the car. “You told _him_.”

“ ’Bout time,” said Joe modestly.

“Past time,” said the kid.

Joe got out on the eleventh floor, feeling wonderful. He walked down the
hall, thumped a door open, and ambled in. Eleanor Bulmer, the
receptionist, looked up. He saw her eyes flick to the clock and back to
his face. “Well!”

“Morning,” he said expansively, from his inflated lungs. She blinked as
if he had fired a cap pistol, then looked confusedly down at her
typewriter.

He took a step toward his corner desk when there was a flurry, a
botherment up from the left, then an apparition of thinning hair and
exophthalmic blue eyes. Barnes, moving at a half-trot as usual, jacket
off, suspenders, armbands pulling immaculate cuffs high and away from
rust-fuzzed scrawny wrists. “Eleanor, get me Apex on the phone. Get me
Apex on the—” And then he saw Joe. He stopped. He smiled. He had
gleaming pale-yellow incisors like a rodent. He, too, flicked a glance
at the clock.

Joe knew exactly what he was going to say, exactly how he was going to
say it. He took a deep breath, and if old ghosts were about to rise in
him, the friendly pressure of the amplifier just under his collarbones
turned them to mist. _Why, Miss Terr Fritch_, Barnes would say with
exaggerated and dramatic politeness, _how ki-i-ind of you to drop in
today_. Then the smile would snap off and the long series of
not-to-be-answered questions would begin. Didn’t he know this was a
place of business? Was he aware of the customary starting time? Did it
not seem that among fourteen punctual people, he alone—and so on. During
it, seven typewriters would stop, a grinning stock boy would stick his
head over a filing cabinet to listen, and Miss Bulmer, over whose nape
the monologue would stream, would sit with her head bowed waiting for it
to pass. Already the typewriter had stopped. And yes, sure enough:
behind Barnes he could see the stock boy’s head.

“Why, Miss Terr Fritch!” said Barnes happily.

Joe immediately filled his lungs, turned his back on Barnes, and said
into the stunned silence, “Better get him Apex on the phone, Eleanor. He
has the whole place at a stand-still.” He then walked around Barnes as
if the man were a pillar and went to his desk and sat down.

Barnes stood with his bony head lowered and his shoulders humped as if
he had been bitten on the neck by a fire ant. Slowly he turned and
glared up the office. There was an immediate explosion of typewriter
noise, shuffling feet, shuffling papers. “I’ll take it in my office,”
Barnes said to the girl.

He had to pass Joe to get there, and to Joe’s great delight he could see
how reluctant Barnes was to do it. “I’ll see you later,” Barnes hissed
as he went by, and Joe called cheerfully after him, “You just betcha.”
Out in the office, somebody whistled appreciatively; somebody snickered.
Joe knew Barnes had heard it. He smiled, and picked up the phone.
“Outside, Eleanor. Personal.”

Eleanor Bulmer knew Barnes didn’t allow personal calls except in
emergencies, and then preferred to give his permission first. Joe could
hear her breathing, hesitating. Then, “Yes, Mr. Fritch.” And the dial
tone crooned in his ear. _Mr. Fritch_, he thought. _That’s the first
time she ever called me Mr. Fritch. What do you know. Why … why, she
never called me anything before! Just “Mr. Barnes wants to see you,” or
“Cohen of Electrical Marketing on the line.”_

Mr. Fritch dialed his home. “Hello—Lutie?”

“Joe! Where were you all night?” The voice was waspish, harrying; he
could see her gathering her forces, he could see her mountain of
complaints about to be shoveled into the telephone as if it were a
hopper.

“I called to tell you I’m all right because I thought it was a good
idea. Maybe it was a bad idea.”

“What?” There was a pause, and then in a quite different tone she said,
“Joe? Is this … Joe, is that you?”

“Sure,” he said heartily. “I’m at work and I’m all right and I’ll be
home for dinner. Hungry,” he added.

“You expect me to cook you a dinner after—” she began, but without quite
her accustomed vigor.

“All right, then I won’t be home for dinner,” he said reasonably.

She didn’t say anything for a long time, but he knew she was still
there. He sat and waited. At last she said faintly, “Will veal cutlets
be all right?”

On the second night after this fledging, Mr. Joseph Fritch strode into
the porte-cochere and bounded up the steps. He ground the bell-push with
his thumb until it hurt, and then knocked. He stood very straight until
the door opened.

“Joe, boy! Come on in.” Zeitgeist left the door and opened another. Joe
had the choice of following or of standing where he was and shouting. He
followed. He found himself in a room new to him, low-ceilinged like the
others, but with books from floor to ceiling. In a massive fieldstone
fireplace flames leaped cheerfully, yet the room was quite cool.
Air-conditioned. Well, he guessed Zeitgeist just _liked_ a fire. “Look,”
he said abruptly.

“Sit down. Drink?”

“No. Listen, you’ve made a mistake.”

“I know, I know. The bill. Got it with you?”

“I have.”

Zeitgeist nodded approvingly. Joe caught himself wondering why.
Zeitgeist glided across to him and pressed a tall glass into his hand.
It was frosty, beaded, sparkling. “What’s in it?” he snapped.

Zeitgeist burst out laughing, and in Joe fury passed, shame passed, and
he found himself laughing, too. He held out his glass and Zeitgeist
clinked with him. “You’re a … a—luck.”

“Luck,” said Zeitgeist. They drank. It was whiskey, the old gentle
muscular whiskey that lines the throat with velvet and instantly heats
the ear lobes. “How did you make out?”

Joe drank again and smiled. “I walked into that office almost an hour
late,” he began, and told what had happened. Then, “And all day it was
like that. I didn’t know a job … people … I didn’t know things could be
like that. Look, I told you I’d pay you. I said I’d pay you anything
you—”

“Never mind that just now. What else happened? The suit and all?”

“That. Oh, I guess I was kind of—” Joe looked into the friendly amber in
his glass, “well, intoxicated. Lunchtime I just walked into King’s and
got the suit. Two suits. I haven’t had a new suit in four years, and
then it didn’t come from King’s. I just signed for ’em,” he added, a
reflective wonderment creeping into his voice. “They didn’t mind.
Shirts,” he said, closing his eyes.

“It’ll pay off.”

“It did pay off,” said Joe, bouncing on his soft chair to sit upright on
the edge, shoulders back, head up. His voice drummed and his eyes were
bright. He set his glass down on the carpet and swatted his hands
gleefully together. “There was this liaison meeting, they call it, this
morning. I don’t know what got into me. Well, I do; but anyway, like
every other copywriter I have a project tucked away; you know—I like it
but maybe no one else will. I had it in my own roughs, up to yesterday.
So I got this bee in my bonnet and went in to the Art Department and
started in on them, and you know, they caught fire, they worked almost
all _night?_ And at the meeting this morning, the usual once-a-month
kind of thing, the brass from the main office looking over us
step-children and wondering why they don’t fold us up and go to an
outside agency. It was so easy!” he chortled.

“I just sat there, shy like always, and there was old Barnes as usual
trying to head off product advertising and go into institutionals,
because he likes to write that stuff himself. Thinks it makes the brass
think he loves the company. So soon as he said ‘institutionals’ I jumped
up and agreed with him and said let me show you one of Mr. Barnes’
ideas. Yeah! I went and got it and you should _see_ that presentation;
you could eat it! So here’s two VPs and a board secretary with their
eyes bugging out and old Barnes not daring to deny anything, and
everybody in the place knew I was lying and thought what a nice fellow I
was to do it that way. And there sat that brass, looking at my haircut
and my tie and my suit and me, and _buying_ it piece by piece, and
Barnes, old Barnes sweating it out.”

“What did they offer you?”

“They haven’t exactly. I’m supposed to go see the chairman Monday.”

“What are you going to do?”

“Say no. Whatever it is, I’ll say no. I have lots of ideas piled
up—nobody would _listen_ before! Word’ll get around soon enough; I’ll
get my big raise the only smart way a man can get a really big one—just
before he goes to work for a new company. Meanwhile I’ll stay and work
hard and be nice to Barnes, who’ll die a thousand deaths.”

Zeitgeist chuckled. “You’re a stinker. What happened when you went
home?”

Joe sank back into his chair and turned toward the flames; whatever his
thoughts were, they suffused him with firelight and old amber, strength
through curing, through waiting. His voice was just that mellow as he
murmured, “That wasn’t you at all. That was me.”

“Oh, sorry. I wasn’t prying.”

“Don’t get me wrong!” said Joe. “I want to tell you.” He laughed softly.
“We had veal cutlets.”

A log fell and Joe watched the sparks shooting upward while Zeitgeist
waited. Suddenly Joe looked across at him with a most peculiar
expression on his face. “The one thing I never thought of till the time
came. I couldn’t wear that thing all night, could I now? I don’t want
her to know. I’ll be … you said I’d grow to … that if I put my back into
it, maybe some day I wouldn’t need it.” He touched his collarbone.

“That’s right,” said Zeitgeist.

“So I couldn’t wear it. And then I couldn’t talk. Not a word.” Again,
the soft laugh. “She wouldn’t sleep, not for the longest time. ‘Joe?’
she’d say, and I’d know she was going to ask where I’d been that night.
I’d say, _‘Shh.’_ and put my hand on her face. She’d hold on to it.
Funny. Funny, how you know the difference,” he said in a near whisper,
looking at the fire again. “She said, ‘Joe?’ just like before, and I
knew she was going to say she was sorry for being … well, all the
trouble we’ve had. But I said _‘Shh_.’ ” He watched the fire silently,
and Zeitgeist seemed to know that he was finished.

“I’m glad,” said Zeitgeist.

“Yeah.”

They shared some quiet. Then Zeitgeist said, waving his glass at the
mantel, “Still think the bill’s out of line?”

Joe looked at it, at the man. “It’s not a question of how much it’s
worth,” he said with some difficulty. “It’s how much I can pay. When I
left here I wanted to pay you whatever you asked—five dollars or five
hundred, I didn’t care what I had to sacrifice. But I never thought it
would be five _thousand!_” He sat up. “I’ll level with you; I don’t have
that kind of money. I never did have. Maybe I never will have.”

“What do you think I fixed you up for?” Zeitgeist’s voice cracked like a
target-gun. “What do you think I’m in business for? I don’t gamble.”

Joe stood up slowly. “I guess I just don’t understand you,” he said
coldly. “Well, at those prices I guess I can ask you to service this
thing so I can get out of here.”

“Sure.” Zeitgeist rose and led the way out of the room and down the hall
to the laboratory. His face was absolutely expressionless, but not
fixed; only relaxed.

Joe shucked out of his jacket, unbuttoned his shirt and took it off. He
unclipped the elastics and pulled the amplifier off over his head.
Zeitgeist took it and tossed it on the bench. “All right,” he said, “get
dressed.”

Joe went white. “What, you want to haggle? Three thousand then, when I
get it,” he said shrilly.

Zeitgeist sighed. “Get dressed.”

Joe turned and snatched at his shirt. “Blackmail. Lousy blackmail.”

Zeitgeist said, “You know better than that.”

There is a quality of permanence about the phrase that precedes a
silence. It bridges the gap between speech and speech, hanging in midair
to be stared at. Joe pulled on his shirt, glaring defiantly at the other
man. He buttoned it up, he tucked in the tails, he put on his tie and
knotted it, and replaced his tie clasp. He picked up his coat. And all
the while the words hung there.

He said, miserably, “I want to know better than that.”

Zeitgeist’s breath hissed out; Joe wondered how long he had been holding
it. “Come here, Joe,” he said gently.

Joe went to the bench. Zeitgeist pulled the amplifier front and center.
“Remember what I told you about this thing—a mike here to pick up chest
tones, band-passes to cut down on what you have too much of, and the
amplifier here to blow up those low resonances? And this?” he pointed.

“The power supply.”

“The power supply,” Zeitgeist nodded. “Well, look; there’s nothing wrong
with the theory. Some day someone will design a rig this compact that
will do the job, and it’ll work just as I said.” His pale gaze flicked
across Joe’s perplexed face and he laughed. “You’re sort of impressed
with all this, aren’t you?” He indicated the whole lab and its contents.

“Who wouldn’t be?”

“That’s the mythos of science, Joe. The layman is as willing to believe
in the superpowers of science as he once did in witches. Now, I told you
once that I believe in the ability of science to save our souls … our
_selves_, if you like that any better. I believe that it’s legitimate to
use any and all parts of science for this purpose. And I believe the
mythos of science is as much one of its parts as Avogadro’s Law or the
conservation of energy. Any layman who’s seen the size of a modern
hearing-aid, who knows what it can do, will accept with ease the idea of
a band-passing amplifier with five watts output powered by a couple of
penlite cells. Well, we just can’t do it. We will, but we haven’t yet.”

“Then what’s this thing? What’s all this gobbledegook you’ve been
feeding me? You give me something, you take it away. You make it work,
you tell me it can’t work. I mean, what are you trying to pull?”

“You’re squeaking. And you’re saying ‘I mean,’ ” said Zeitgeist.

“Cut it out,” Joe said desperately.

The pale eyes twinkled at him, but Zeitgeist made a large effort and
went back to his subject. “All this is, this thing you’ve been wearing,
is the mike here, which triggers these two diaphragm vibrators here,
powered by these little dry cells. No amplifier, no speaker, no nothing
but this junk and the mythos.”

“But it worked; I heard it right here on your tape machine!”

“With the help of half a ton of components.”

“But at the office, the liaison meeting, I … I—Oh—”

“For the first time in your life you walked around with your chest out.
You faced people with your shoulders back and you looked ’em smack in
the eye. You dredged up what resonance you had in that flattened-out
chest of yours and flung it in people’s faces. I didn’t lie to you when
I said they _had_ to listen to you. They had to as long as you believed
they had to.”

“Did you have to drag out all this junk to make me believe that?”

“I most certainly did! Just picture it: you come to me here all covered
with bruises and guilt, suicidal, cowed, and without any realizable
ambition. I tell you all you need to do is stand up straight and spit in
their eye. How much good would that have done you?”

Joe laughed shakily. “I feel like one of those characters in the old
animated cartoons. They’d walk off the edge of a cliff and hang there in
midair, and there they’d stay, grinning and twirling their canes, until
they looked down. Then—boom!” He tried another laugh, and failed with
it. “I just looked down,” he said hoarsely.

“You’ve got it a little backwards,” said Zeitgeist. “Remember how you
looked forward to graduating—to the time when you could discard that
monkey-puzzle and stand on your own feet? Well, son, you just made it.
Come on; this calls for a drink!”

Joe jammed his arms into his jacket. “Thanks, but I just found out I can
talk to my wife.”

They started up the hall. “What do you do this for, Zeitgeist?”

“It’s a living.”

“Is that streamlined mousetrap out there the only bait you use?”

Zeitgeist smiled and shook his head.

For the second time in fifteen minutes Joe said, “I guess I just don’t
understand you,” but there was a world of difference. Suddenly he broke
away from the old man and went into the room with the fireplace. He came
back, jamming the envelope into his pocket. “I can handle this,” he
said. He went out.

Zeitgeist leaned in the doorway, watching him go. He’d have offered him
a ride, but he wanted to see him walk like that, with his head up.



NEW YORK VIGNETTE


JOHN: We wanted to tell you a story this morning … a New York story but
something special … something different and so we asked a special,
different sort of writer to send us one. His name is Theodore
Sturgeon … and he’s the winner of the International Fantasy Award for
the best science fiction novel of 1954—a beautiful and enchanted novel
called … “MORE THAN HUMAN.” In just a few days, you’ll be able to see
Ted’s award, a gleaming chromium spaceship, in the window of Brentano’s
Fifth Avenue shop. We’re really not altogether certain whether Ted’s
written us a story or not … but I’ll read you his letter. It begins—Dear
“PULSE”:

MUSIC: OPENING CURTAIN … NICE, NORMAL … BRIGHT. UNDER FOR:

JOHN: When I got your note, I was delighted at the idea of doing a story
for you. I went straight to the typewriter, unwound the typewriter
ribbon from the neck and ears of my baby daughter, Tandy, sat down on my
son Robin’s plastic automobile, got up again, picked the pieces of
plastic out of myself and the chair, dried Robin’s tears, handed Tandy
to her mother for a bath, rewound the ribbon, put some paper in the
machine, and nothing happened. You see, what you did is ask for a story
at one of those times when a writer can’t write and nothing can make him
write. I tried, honestly I did. I played all the tricks on myself I ever
learned. I drank two cups of strong, black coffee, I did some
knee-bends, I filed my nails, read the morning paper all the way
through, ate a stale bagel and a handful of raisins, sniffed at a bottle
of aromatic spirits of ammonia to clear my head, and lit my pipe. I
don’t like a pipe but it makes me feel like an author. I even had a
small quarrel with my wife, which sometimes works wonders. Still no
story.

There was nothing for it but to go out and wander. They say New York has
something for everyone—you just have to know where to look. I went
looking first on Rockefeller Plaza, which never fails to do something to
me. I hung over the rail and watched the skaters moving like moths and
mayflies to music that came from nowhere, everywhere … anyone who can
pass them by without a glance has lost his sense of wonder, and I’m
sorry for him. I looked for sunlight high on the clean, clever buildings
reaching into the morning and found it. I listened to the whisper of
blades on ice, tires on asphalt, of a hundred thousand heels on paving
all blended like a great breathing. But it was only magic, its own
special kind of magic; it didn’t give me a story idea for you.

So I left and walked west past the place where Dave Garroway holds forth
in the early, early hours, towards the Avenue of the Americas, where
stores and theaters were beginning to wake, where men can make keys for
you and you can buy crepes suzettes and cameras and luggage and
lingerie; and I slowly became aware of a neat pair of shoulders and a
smooth neat hat. I must have been following the man for minutes without
quite realizing it. The coat was one of those banker’s specials—you
know, flat and formal and with a smooth narrow collar that might be
velvet and might be fur. And the hat was what some people call a bowler
and some a derby. Hat and collar were not black, but of the darkest
possible brown, and the whole aspect was—well, _neat_. He was strolling
along, turning his head a little from time to time, and though I
couldn’t see his face I somehow knew he was smiling at storefronts,
automobiles, marquees, people—smiling at the whole, wide world. I
wondered what he was smiling about. I wondered, too, what kind of a
smile it might be. Was he smiling _at?_ or smiling _with?_

The first corner we came to was the one where the Radio City Music Hall
squats like a kneeling elephant with its big friendly mouth open, and in
the entrance stood two girls. One of them reminded me of mint leaves and
the other was as real and pretty as a field of daisies. I saw the man in
the brown bowler hat walk up to them and he bowed from the waist, that
stiff, slight, quaint little gesture that can only be done by a certain
sort of person, because it makes the rest of us look silly. He raised
the hard, neat hat a trifle and by the tilt of his head and the pleasure
just beginning on the girls’ faces, I knew he was smiling a special
smile. From his pocket he drew something and handed it to one of the
girls, the field-of-daisies one, and without pausing, with never a break
in his leisurely stride, he went on.

Then it was my turn to pass the girls. They stared after the man and
their mouths were round as a thumbprint. Then one of them looked down in
her hand and “Lark!” she said, “Oh, Lark, look: he gave us tickets for
‘JUPITER’S DARLING!’ How did he know I wanted to see it so much?” They
stared after him spellbound as I passed, and happy as Christmas. I
followed the man across the avenue, thinking, “Lark, Lark. Now what a
nice name for a girl that is!” and watching him. A few doors up from the
corner is a hardware store, and the hardware man had set a tall ladder
against the building. He was up there looking at a place where his
awning had slipped off its little hooks where I suppose the wind had
bent them. And before I knew what was happening my man in the brown
bowler had skipped up two rungs of the ladder. He stood there balanced
easily, and with one hand he tipped his hat and with the other he took
from his pocket a pair of pliers and handed them up to the hardware
fellow. Then off he went again, up the avenue, and when I passed the
ladder I could see from the hardware fellow’s face that he, too, had
gotten a special smile from the man: a piece of it was on _his_ lips. He
took the pliers, scratched his head. I heard him laugh, and then he
began to fix his awning as if the pliers were exactly the tool he
needed, which I’m sure they were.

I hurried then, because I wanted to see the face of such a man as this,
and I hadn’t, yet. I caught up with him at 50th Street. He had paused
there, waiting for something. Maybe he was waiting to decide which way
to go, and maybe he was waiting for me; I don’t know. As I drew abreast
he turned to face me.

Now, I don’t want to disappoint you but I can’t tell you what his face
was like. All I can say is that it was as neat as the rest of him,
everything about it just where it should be. He smiled.

It was like looking into a bright light, but it didn’t dazzle. It was
warm, like the windows of farmhouses late at night when there’s snow. It
made me smile too, the biggest, widest smile that ever happened to me,
so wide that I heard a little … (ONE CLEAR _CHUCK_, AS WHEN ONE CHUCKS
TO A HORSE: BUT ONLY ONE) … somewhere in my back teeth. I must have been
bemused for a second or two, because when I blinked the feeling away,
the man was gone. Still smiling, I got into a cab that pulled up for the
light just then; I suddenly wanted to be home, next to Robin and Tandy
and my wife, while I felt just that way.

As the cab started to move, I turned and looked through the rear window
and I saw the man briefly, just once more. One of those poor, cowed,
unhappy men had sidled up to him, and in every line of his shabby figure
I recognized him and all like him, and I could all but hear the cringing
voice, “Dime fer a cuppa cawfee, mister?” And the last thing I saw was
the reflection of that incredible smile on the man’s dirty face, as Mr.
Brown Bowler Hat reached into his impossible pocket and handed the man a
thick, steaming china mug of hot coffee and walked on.

I leaned back on the cushions and watched New York streaming past
outside, and I thought: “Well, if this city has something for everyone,
then I suppose it has in it a man who can reach into his pocket and
grant anyone’s smaller, happy-making wishes.” And then I thought, “he
has tickets and tools and cups of coffee and heaven knows what else for
other people, but he apparently couldn’t give me the one thing I wanted
at the time, which was a little story for ‘PULSE.’ ” So here I am home
again, feeling sort of nice because my wife and kids appreciate the bit
of smile I brought in, but otherwise disappointed because, whatever else
happened, I don’t have a story for you. I guess the man in the brown
bowler hat didn’t have one in his pocket at the time.

Yours very truly,

                      Theodore Sturgeon

P.S. On the other hand, maybe he did.



THE HALF-WAY TREE MURDER


THE MYRTLE BANK HOTEL in Jamaica has a marquee built out over the
blood-warm water of Kingston Harbor. It overlooks the swimming pool with
its lounging, laughing bathers. Drinks are served swiftly by
white-gloved waiters. It is warm and shadowed, restful and luxurious.

Cotrell, the C.I.D. man, sat there with the most extraordinary woman he
had ever seen.

This had never happened to him before. He was a good man—the Criminal
Investigation Division’s best in the district—and he hung doggedly to a
case until he had it cracked. But at the same time he had always been
able to separate business from pleasure. For weeks now he had been under
the spell of Brunhilde Moot, and yet, for all her effect on him, the
Half-Way Tree affair kept circling back into his mind.

He watched her while she watched the sea, the haze across the Harbor
that was the wicked sunken pirate city Port Royal, the distant mountains
marching up and away to meet the heavy, brazen sky. Her eyes always
returned to the fishing boats which worked close inshore, and she
watched them … perhaps she watched the crews, the half-naked, sweating,
muscular black and brown and bronze and tan bodies as they worked.

Cotrell felt a smoky surge of distress at the thought; he shook himself
angrily. He had a great deal more to do than to help an exotic
brown-eyed blonde enjoy the mysteries in which she cloaked herself. And
he could ill afford to let the spell deepen.

He watched her while she watched the sea, or the mountains, or the
boats—or was it the men and their nets, the men and their rippling
backs?—and he thought, who is she? She had come off a cruise ship three
months before, because she liked Jamaica. She would stay indefinitely,
leave when it seemed a good idea—tomorrow, next week, or never.

She apparently had unlimited credit. Her clothes told nothing about her
but that she had exquisite taste, and that she shopped wherever she
found excellence. He knew she spoke Dutch and Spanish, and her English
was accented by no accent at all. Her passport was Swiss, which might
mean anything. When pressed for information about herself, she used an
ancient, woman’s weapon—an abrupt, courteous, smiling silence which was
like a slap in the face.

“You’re hypnotized,” he said abruptly.

She drew her attention in to herself, turned and looked at him and away.
When she did that, he felt the heat, as from the opening and closing of
an oven door.

“I am,” she admitted. “Jamaica is so—_old_. The old buildings, the old
society, decayed and polished. I met a man at Constant Spring last
evening who quite naturally clicked his heels when he bowed. And yet,
just back a little from the coast, it’s savage. Wild growth and rot,
breeding and steaming and killing itself, and breeding and growing
again.”

“You like that.” It was not a question.

She knew, and did not answer. She looked at her drink, lifted it, tilted
it so that the liquid beaded up on the edge. Not a drop spilled on her
steady hand. “Any news on the Half-Way Tree affair?”

“How did you know I’d been thinking of it? No, nothing new. I was going
to ask you—”

“Yes?” Her eyes were so wide apart that he sometimes thought they were
set on the sides of her head rather than in front. That, and her sharply
pointed teeth, and the breadth and strength of her, were what was so
strongly animal, for all her impregnable dignity.

“Forgive me—one shouldn’t make analytical comments. You are not like
other people, Brunhilde. You don’t think like other people. I—shall I be
frank?”

“Of course.” Was she laughing?

“I can’t say I always like the way your mind works. It—”

“It’s too direct?” She did laugh, now, like wind through a cello. “I’ve
heard it before. Too direct … there are things I want, and things I
like, and I get them. There are things I have no use for, and I avoid
them.” She looked again at the boats.

Cotrell hung manfully to what he wanted to say. “I need a new point of
view on the Half-Way Tree murder. I would like you to help me.”

“Well,” she breathed. After a moment she said, “Jeff, I’m hardly
flattered. I’ve heard a great deal about you. You took in at least four
extremely important foreign agents during the war. It was you who broke
up the Panamanian drug ring. You have a reputation for cracking cases
without any but routine help. And now you ask me to look at a thing like
this—a simple murder, a month old, of a crossroads Chinese shopkeeper
who was killed by a black hill boy for a few shillings. It’s not worth
bothering with, Jeff.”

“It’s murder.”

“Murder!” she said scornfully. “It was killing, and the jungle’s full of
it. From what you’ve told me about the case, it’s quite simple. The boy
Stanton—”

“Stanley.”

“Whatever—the boy had motive and opportunity and can’t account for his
time. Try him and hang him then, mark up another successful case, and go
on with your important work. There are a hundred thousand illiterate
hill-runners here. One won’t be missed.”

“Stanley could have done it,” said Cotrell carefully, “but he
_wouldn’t_.”

“That,” said Brunhilde Moot flatly, “doesn’t matter.” A large red ant
chinned on the overhang of the tabletop. She bent to watch it. It gained
the surface and began to amble between the moisture-rings left by their
glasses.

She said, “The old Chinaman had a brother who will get all his
property—isn’t that so? And he certainly knew where the money was
hidden. Hang him, then, and have done with it.”

“He’s my friend,” said Cotrell with some difficulty.

Again he felt the heat and brilliance of her gaze. She bent again over
the ant. She blew the ash from her cigarette and swept the glowing tip
across the ant’s antennae. It curled up, straightened, blundered into a
drop of moisture from one of the sweating glasses, and struggled there.

“I want you to meet him,” said Cotrell.

“I would like to,” she said. “I would like to see what a transplanted
oriental, living at the edge of the jungle, has to recommend himself to
a man of your stature.” There was considerable insult buried in the
phrase. Brunhilde was richer, stronger, more beautiful, and certainly
more intelligent that anyone’s average, and was deeply conscious of it.
To her, the world was obviously composed of a handful of people and a
great many members of the lower orders.

“Lunch there, perhaps?” Cotrell said. “I can offer you a pleasant drive,
and certainly some native cooking.”

“You do intrigue me,” she smiled. “And I would so like to think, later,
that I had helped you catch and hang your man.”

“Good,” said Cotrell. He looked at his watch and rose. “I’ll send Yem
Foong a wire, and we’ll be on our way. I hope I’m not rushing you?”

“I can be ready in five minutes,” she said.

While he was taking care of the check, she stepped to the end of the
marquee for another long look at the harbor. As Jeff Cotrell stepped up
behind her a moment later, a thirty-foot dugout was moving almost
directly under the end of the marquee. Brunhilde tensed as she watched
it. In the bow was a giant who could have modeled for a Hercules. As he
bent over the paddle, they could see three long scratches in his golden
back.

“Damn,” said Brunhilde Moot. She straightened, turned, saw Cotrell.
“I’ve broken my fingernail,” she said. “See you in five minutes. The
lobby?”

He nodded and managed to smile. When she had reached the landward end of
the marquee he returned to the table, picked up a glass, and with its
base killed the red ant which still struggled there. He was a little
surprised at himself when the glass broke in his hand. He went to
compose and send his telegram.

In Cotrell’s low-slung Lanchester, Brunhilde closed her eyes when the
car approached an intersection and turned, opening them again on the
other side. “Drive left,” she read from a sign. “I’m still not quite
used to it. Pulling over to the left to let a car overtake you,stopping
in the middle of the street to wait for a right turn. I’m glad you’re
driving.”

“You have driven here though, haven’t you?” asked Cotrell, his eyes on
the road.

“Not enough to like it—oh! What a wonderful place! See—goats on the
sidewalk! And that old woman with the donkey!”

“Yes, pretty much the same as it’s been for the last three centuries.
That’s the charm of this place; but it has its drawbacks. Have you ever
noticed the little Spanish-wall houses with thatched roofs and louvred
windows?”

“Yes. They all seem to be the same size.”

“That’s right. About a hundred and fifty years ago the Home Government
put a tax on every room of a house over two, and another on glass
windows. The natives simply stopped building houses with more than two
rooms, and put in those slatted windows. And although the law has been
repealed for over half a century, the custom persists.

“And it’s the same way with their attitude toward banks. The Chinese
shopkeepers particularly were suspicious of banks in the old days, and
many of them still have their caches around, in, or under the shops
where they make their money.”

“Yes, you told me about that right after I arrived.”

“So I did,” said Cotrell, deftly avoiding a barefoot girl who walked
along the road weaving a basket, singing, and carrying a tremendous tray
of fruit on her head. “Well, they’re learning, I think. Yem Ching,
though—he was an educated man. Too intelligent, really, to have followed
the old customs the way he did. Well, he’s dead. Perhaps a few of his
colleagues will profit by the poor chap’s murder. Somebody should,
besides the brute who did him in.”

“Oh—so you believe in basic justice?” smiled Brunhilde. “For every loss,
a profit somewhere?”

“In a sense I do,” said Cotrell, glancing at her. “For every crime, a
punishment, in any case.”

She laughed. “I _love_ policemen!” She leaned back, taking in the
whisking scenery—the bamboo, the rows of mangoes. “I’m hungry.”

“Yem Foong will take care of that, and well.”

“You seem to mean that. The only thing I’ve seen the natives eating is
rice and beans and that horrible crawly-looking yampi.”

“You’re in for a surprise. Don’t underestimate the culture of these
people. It’s a culture which isn’t measured by telephones and plumbing.
Or savings banks, unfortunately.”

“You still intrigue me. What do you suppose they’ll have for lunch?”

“Couldn’t say. Whatever it is will be delicious and—exotic.”

“Wonderful, wonderful,” she said.

“Though I hope,” he said, “that it won’t be salt fish and ackey.”

“I beg your pardon?”

“Salt fish and ackey. Quite a delicacy.”

“And you don’t like it?”

“Oh, I do, but I don’t eat it.”

“What’s ‘ackey’?”

“I’ll show you. There’s lots of it growing along here—See? See there?”

He pointed to a line of trees growing across the deep ditch which
imperils all Jamaican traffic. They were shade trees with dark glossy
leaves, among which their brilliant orange-yellow fruit showed. Cotrell
pulled up.

“I’ll show you one,” he said.

He vaulted over the low door and leaped the ditch, to come back in a
moment with one of the bright fruit in his hand. He gave it to
Brunhilde. It was about the size of a large orange, and had a hard black
encrustation, like ebony, protruding from its side.

“What’s that?”

“The seed,” said Cotrell, smoothly shifting gears. “It grows half in and
half out.”

“I’ve never seen anything like it. And is it good?”

“Delicious,” said Cotrell. “I avoid it because, when it’s out of season,
and even in season when it isn’t prepared exactly right, it’s deadly
poison. Really. We have deaths every year from it. I prefer to be on the
safe side.”

Brunhilde brooded over the fruit for a moment, turning it over and over,
and then suddenly tossed it out of the car. “If there is a difference
between the way our minds work,” she said, “you can see it here. I’ve
never tasted ackey. Just because of that, I want to. If I had tasted it,
as you have, and knew it to be delicious, I’d want it again.

“I think that this is one of the biggest things in being alive. If my
host is cultured, as you say, and if he trusts his cook, then I am quite
willing to trust him. As to the risk—why, one is quite likely to die
from a bad cold. One might as well get some pleasure from the process.”

Cotrell smiled, glancing briefly at his passenger. “I’ll take the cold,
thank you. Ackey poisoning is a very unpleasant business. Terrible
tummy-ache, y’know, vomiting and choking. Pretty quick, though, if you
can’t get to a stomach pump.”

“Jeff,” she said softly, “I simply cannot be frightened. Not by
anything.”

“I think I realized that some time ago,” said Jeff Cotrell. “You’re
well-armed, Brunhilde. It would be difficult to imagine you in a
situation where you couldn’t use your quick mind, or your strength, or—”

She smiled widely, so that he saw the pointed teeth, and arched her
back. “—or any other of my attributes,” she finished for him. He
flushed. “You’re so right,” she added. “Hence I have nothing to fear,
ever.”

They took an unpaved side road just outside Half-Way Tree, and bumped
along it for half a mile until they came to a crossroads. Under a giant
tamarind tree was the shop. It boasted a sign: YEM FOONG. _Ginger
Beer—Yard goods_. CATERER TO HIS HONOR THE GOVERNOR.

“The sign is new,” said Brunhilde.

“Very observant of you,” said Cotrell, turning into the shop’s yard.
“Some of the people, you see, are very superstitious and wouldn’t go
into a shop if it bore a dead man’s name. They’d be afraid he’d wait on
them.”

“I shall be looking,” she said, “for the culture and intelligence you
tell me I’ll find here.”

“I have said you’re observant,” he countered, opening the door for her.
She laid a hand on his arm.

“Jeff …”

“Yes?”

“If I help you catch your man, will you do me a favor?”

“But of course. Anything I can.”

“You can. I want to go to the hanging.”

“You want—”

“Jeff, you promised.”

“Very well,” he said.

They walked up the short path and entered the shop, blinking the
sunlight out of their eyes. It was cool and dim inside. There were no
show-windows. The packed-earth walls were thick and the windows small.
Along one wall ran a board counter, behind which were bolts of cotton,
canned goods, bottles of rum, and fruit juices, racked on shelves.

There were a couple of battered tables and some chairs out on the
packed-earth floor, and in the corner was a water-box filled with ice
and small stone bottles of ginger-beer, cane-juice, ale, and
bright-colored, sticky-sweet soft drinks.

“Mr. Cotrell, sir. Most welcome. This place is entirely yours.”

Yem Foong was tiny, wizened, completely bald. He wore a long black linen
jacket which buttoned up to its stiff, round collar by a series of black
silk frogs. His clothes were pressed and smooth, and so were his face
and his voice.

“Foong! So glad to see you again, old fellow. This is Miss Moot, of whom
I have spoken to you. She has, she tells me, a high regard for the
Jamaican cuisine.”

Brunhilde inclined her head and extended her hand. But already Yem Foong
had folded his own and was bowing deeply.

“A presence such as yours begins to compensate for the emptiness of this
unfortunate house.”

“Yes, I had heard about your brother,” said Brunhilde huskily. “I can’t
tell you all I feel.”

“You have told me,” said Yem, graciously. “Now, if you will step this
way, what little I have been able to prepare for you is ready.”

They went through the rear door. A low table was set in the inner room,
and Brunhilde stopped momentarily at sight of it. It was laid with
exquisite Spode, and Jensen silver. A single spray of jasmine lay in a
squat crystal bowl in the center of the table.

They seated themselves. Brunhilde looked from end to end of the table,
admiringly, and at the tapestried wall facing her, and around and down
to the far corner of the room, where there was a fresh-dug hole about a
yard square in the earthen floor. On turning back, Brunhilde found
herself in the direct gaze of both her companions.

“My poor brother met his ancestors there,” said Yem, sorrowfully, “as he
was replacing the money, and the other things.”

“Other things?”

Yem shrugged. “Things of little value, except to us. Some carved jade,
and a little golden casket containing a scrap of rice paper. It was
supposed to be an original poem by Sun Yü,” he added regretfully. “The
money was nothing. Money is only the substance of living—stuff of the
bones and the belly. The craftsmanship of two thousand years ago is
important only to that part of a man which is not an animal.”

“I understand,” said Brunhilde. “And of course it was a man who was all
animal who stole the things. Have you found nothing that would indicate
who the criminal was?”

Yem Foong shrugged tiredly. “How can one know for certain? The shop was
not yet locked. It was just at dusk, which is a rapid thing in the
tropics. I was in Kingston, buying yard goods, and the servants were in
their quarters. And during that time when everything is shadowed,
someone slipped in and did—what was done.

“It could have been from inside or outside; it could have been some
wanderer on the road outside, a stranger; or it could have been a
neighbor, or even someone here—who knows? The promise of riches draws
many kinds of men.”

A servant entered, a dark brown youth with sharply slanted brows and
woolly hair which grew into a widow’s peak. Brunhilde watched him upward
through her lashes as he catfooted around the table, setting out the
appetizer.

When the boy left, Cotrell said, “That is Stanley?” as if for
Brunhilde’s benefit.

“Yes,” said Yem. “A strange boy, but a good one.”

“He looks like Mephisto himself,” murmured Brunhilde to the dish before
her. It was one she had not seen before—half a starapple, an exotic
fruit with a five-pointed star of red-purple in its center, and
delectable flesh which shaded off through red and pink to snow-white on
the outside.

“Mephisto. Interesting you should say that,” said Cotrell. “Eh, Foong?”

“Yes,” said the oriental. “Stanley’s father was an _obeah_ man—a wizard,
up in the mountains near Gimme-Me-Bit. Stanley is the only native I have
ever known who watches a sunset for the beauty he finds there. He
collects colored stones, too, and has done some remarkable things in
landscapes made with moth’s wings.”

Stanley returned with the soup—black bean soup, piping hot, freshened
with a touch of limejuice and containing chilled spears of avocado.
Again Brunhilde’s thoughtful gaze was on the boy.

“You seem very quiet,” said Cotrell halfway through the course.

“What else?” smiled Brunhilde Moot. “The soup—it has quite left me
speechless! Delicious, Mr. Yem.”

“I delight in your enjoyment,” said Yem.

“I wonder,” said Cotrell, “how you’ll enjoy _this_,” and, reaching under
the table, he scooped up something and dropped it in front of her with a
thump. It was an old, earth-stained, leather-bound satchel.

“Wh—” It was barely a sound at all which Brunhilde Moot uttered. “Why
should I enjoy a thing like this?” she asked steadily.

“Your sense of the dramatic,” said Cotrell.

She looked at him with a new roundness to her eyes. There was obviously
a kind of subtlety which she had considered quite beyond this sallow,
patient, tropical man. She looked at the satchel.

“What is it?” she asked.

“It’s the bag that was buried in the corner there.”

“Where on earth did it come from?”

“Right across the road. It’d been thrown into the canefield,” said
Cotrell. He busied himself with the straps. Almost defiantly, Brunhilde
ate soup.

“Look,” said Cotrell, tilting the open top of the satchel toward her. It
was full of colorful, oversized British banknotes.

“Is that—”

Yem Foong nodded. “It’s all there. All the money, that is. The other
things, the little things—they’re not here at all.”

Stanley was in the room and had reached the table before they saw him.
He gathered up Brunhilde’s soup-dish and then saw the satchel. He
uttered a faint shriek, dropped the dish on the floor, and bolted.

“Stanley!” cried Foong.

Brunhilde leaned back and smiled at Cotrell. “That,” she said, “is a
very guilty animal.”

“Stanley?” Yem Foong’s eyes widened. “Miss Moot—that is impossible!”

“It is? Mr. Yem, I have seen a good deal. I think I can spot a guilty
reaction when I see one. Really, Jeff, are you just going to sit there
and let that—that killer get away?”

“Stanley is Yem Foong’s servant,” said Cotrell coldly. “I’m sure he can
handle the situation.”

“Thank you, Mr. Cotrell. I am embarrassed for my house and its
servants.” He clapped his hands. An old woman poked her seamed mahogany
face in at the door.

“Sephronia,” said Foong quietly, “send Stanley to me directly.”

The face disappeared, and almost immediately Stanley shuffled in. His
feline gait was gone, and his eyes were filled with raw panic. The
slanted eyebrows now looked ridiculous.

“Stanley,” said Foong, without anger, “why you behave so, mon?” In
speaking to the boy, his voice took on the singsong cadences of the
native dialect.

Stanley looked at the satchel. “It de money-bag, mahstah! It leave heah
by de dead han’ o’ Mahstah Ching his own se’f!”

“What’s all that?” Brunhilde demanded.

Cotrell smiled. “He is afraid of the satchel because he thinks it was
left here—or brought back—by Ching’s ghost.” He turned to the boy and
said, “You fool youse’f, mon. It was my very han’ dat fin’ de bag dere
an’—” he wiggled his fingers—“it not dead yet. No one harass de garlic
you put ’pon de door an’ window-dem, as you can plainly see.”

The boy raised startled eyes to the tops of the doors and windows. There
were sprigs of garlic over all of them. Relief flooded his strange face.

“Ah, bahss, I love you for dat! I do indeed, for it were a cru-ell an’
wicked start I had to see de money-bag itse’f, dere. I know full well no
duppie can cross de garlic. I am a eejut, sah, a strikin’ eejut.”

“Go about you work, mon,” smiled Foong.

Stanley picked up the dishes and went out, praising every inhabitant of
heaven under his breath.

“You speak that calypso like the natives,” chuckled Brunhilde.

Cotrell chuckled with her, but grimly. “I _was_ born here, you know,” he
said.

Eyes down, Brunhilde meticulously positioned and repositioned the silver
before her. “You know, Jeff,” she said. “I think you’re letting that
savage pull the wool over your eyes. Think a minute. Didn’t you say he
magpies pretty things? Didn’t you tell me he was a little strange, with
his collecting rocks and gaping at the sunset? And doesn’t a servant
come and go as he chooses—isn’t he in a position to know where everyone
in the house may be at a particular time—say, at dusk?

“Wouldn’t he know where anything of value might be hidden? You have no
real clues here. Only by determining what kind of person might have
committed the crime can you choose between suspects. I would say that
the boy fills the bill. He had motive, opportunity, strength, and the
peculiar tastes that would make him do such a thing.”

Cotrell and Yem exchanged a glance. Stanley re-entered with the next
course.

“Ah!” said Cotrell. “Salt fish and ackey! You’ve got your wish,
Brunhilde. Fall to. No thank you, Stanley. None for me. I’ll just have
the coat-of-arms.” And he heaped his plate with the ubiquitous Jamaica
Coat-of-Arms—rice and kidney beans.

“I’d love some,” said Brunhilde, passing Cotrell a queenly glance. “A
little more. That’s fine, thank you.” She tasted it. “Why, it’s
delicious.”

“It is good, isn’t it?” said Yem Foong. “Especially with the salt fish.”

Brunhilde took a little of each. “My! The fish is really briny.” She
sipped her water, sipped again. “Jeff, you don’t know what you are
missing.”

“I do,” said Cotrell. “But I’m quite happy with this, thank you.”

Brunhilde munched daintily and sipped. “May I have more water, please?
Thank you. To get back to Stanley—what _do_ you think? You did ask my
help, you know.”

Yem Foong said, “Stanley was with me in Kingston that night. Of all the
servants, he, least of all, could have done it.”

There was a tense silence. Brunhilde Moot ate more ackey. “Where’s the
evidence to that?” she demanded.

“Yem Foong’s word,” said Cotrell. “It’s good.”

“Well, then, the whole thing’s perfectly simple.” She spoke as if to
children. “Mr. Yem can testify that Stanley was here, you can bring up
something of his background, and get a conviction.”

Cotrell slowly put his fork down. “You really do mean that, don’t you?”

“Of course.” She looked at him over her glass.

“Because this boy is a little unusual, and because he has no education,
and because he’s black, you feel I should run him in, throw him to the
Assizes, and have him hung whether he’s guilty or not?”

Brunhilde shrugged. “You told me yourself that the island is
overpopulated.”

“That tears it,” gritted Cotrell. “That jolly well pays the bloody
piper. Miss Moot, you’re a rotter. I had an idea before that you were a
filthy swine, but I wouldn’t let myself believe it—not really, not even
with proof after proof—What are you laughing at?”

Brunhilde Moot carefully nibbled, chewed, swallowed, and laughed again
at the fuming C.I.D. man. “You,” she said imperturbably. “Ever since I
first saw you at the Myrtle Bank two months ago, you have worn that
restrained British mask of yours. I wondered then what would ever break
it up and make it human, and now I’ve done it.”

Purpling, Jeff Cotrell half rose. Yem Foong checked him with a gesture.
“No, Inspector. Now we need only wait.”

Cotrell looked at him, slumped back.

“Are you all right?” the old man asked Brunhilde solicitously.

“All right? But of course.”

“You were not eating,” said Yem Foong, “and I thought—”

With an obvious effort, she addressed herself to the salt fish and ackey
again. A delicate line of droplets appeared on her upper lip. She dabbed
at them with her napkin, paling. Suddenly she put down her fork, looked
at her plate, and at the two intent men.

Jeff Cotrell nodded, his eyes tight on her face. “Just the right food
for your kind,” he said, “out of season and all.”

“My kind—”

“Rats,” said Cotrell. “Mad dogs.”

“It—isn’t poison! Yem has—”

Yem Foong dropped his eyes to his plate. “I haven’t touched mine.”

Brunhilde Moot’s face turned a pasty gray. “I—feel—” Suddenly she was on
her feet, her lips twitching. The transformation was more shocking, much
more, than had been Cotrell’s outburst. She flung herself across the
table, clawed hands outstretched, and closed them on Yem’s embroidered
jacket.

“Eat it, damn you,” she screamed. “Eat it!”

Cotrell leaned across and very carefully brought the edge of his palm
down on the side of her neck, hard. The expression on her face did not
change, but her hands relaxed. She slid limply back, slowly began to sag
on to the table. Cotrell rolled her unceremoniously to the floor. She
moved, clawed at the dirt floor, and got to her knees, her head hanging.

“You feel sick,” gritted Cotrell. “Don’t let it worry you, old girl.
It’ll get worse. The right way for you to go out, too. You’re not human.
You’re not a member of anything human. The colossal gall of you, to go
about like a—” his voice thickened—“like a woman, like a beautiful warm
human woman.”

He pulled himself up with an effort. Yem looked at him with deep,
understanding eyes. “You murdered Yem Ching because you were bored,
because you wanted to watch me try to break the case, talk about it with
me over a drink!”

There was a horrid, wrenching, human explosion. Cotrell turned his head
away. “That’s only the first spasm,” he said coldly. “You’ll do that
until you choke to death.”

The seizure subsided. She squatted back and turned miserable eyes up to
Cotrell. “Doctor,” she murmured. “Stomach pump—”

“I wouldn’t get a doctor for you if there was a medical convention out
there under the tamarind tree!” said Cotrell.

“Get … doctor,” she whimpered. “I—stomach—” and she moaned. It was a
weak, piteous, broken sound. “I killed him,” she whispered.
“Got—souvenirs.” Again there was the frightening, tearing spasm.
“Doctor—”

“Souvenirs? The little casket and the jade?”

She nodded.

“Where are they?”

She shuddered violently, and turned up a glance of unqualified hatred.
“Get doctor.”

“All right. You tell me where the souvenirs are, and I’ll see to it that
you don’t die from ackeys.”

She made a listless gesture. Following it, Cotrell dumped the contents
of her handbag onto the table. In the glittering clutter of
gem-encrusted compact, cigarette case, and matching perfume atomizer,
was a tiny carven jade figurine. Cotrell held it out to Yem, who took it
and nodded.

“Where’s the box?”

“Stocking-casket. Hotel room.”

Cotrell took out his notebook, hurriedly scribbled in it. “Diary. Tells
how,” she added. “Quickly—get me a doctor!”

Cotrell ripped out the leaf. “Have Stanley run this to the telegraph
office. Quickly,” he said to Yem.

Yem took it wordlessly and went out.

“You—” said Cotrell to the huddled thing on the floor, and the syllable
was all scorn, all revulsion. “You couldn’t be frightened—not when you
could be a woman. But you can’t smile and raise your ruddy eyebrow when
you’re behaving like a poisoned mongrel, eh? By heaven, I had to play
you like a fish to get you out here and get that confession—and the
‘souvenirs.’ That’s all we needed. We have two witnesses who saw you
near here that night, and half a hundred who saw you driving down the
Spanish Town Road on the wrong side.

“We couldn’t pin you down to the shop, but now we have the jade and the
casket. You didn’t think we’d suspect a woman of a bludgeoning, did
you?” He broke off to let another horrible retching spell pass. When it
was over, he said, “Oh, yes. That. The salt fish made you thirsty. Made
you drink water. Water that was loaded with a nice tasteless essence of
_nux vomica_. There’s nothing wrong with the ackey.”

Brunhilde Moot began to cry. Cotrell put the manacles on her. She did
not resist. She cried as if she did not quite know how to do it. It was
probably the first time in years that she had cried.

“Why?” she said. “Why this sneaky, rotten way to trap me?”

Jeff Cotrell turned his back. His voice came thickly, “It was the only
way. If you could have stood up, faced it, fought it, then I—I
-shouldn’t have been able—”

The sound behind him, suddenly, was not a sob, but the shadow of a
laugh. “A conquest!” she said. “I suppose I shall get to the hanging
after all; and there you’ll be too. A mad infatuation can very easily
destroy a man—and his pride.”

Jeff Cotrell turned away, his face ashen. “Not this man,” he said. “No.
No, I’m quite sure you’re wrong.”



THE SKILLS OF XANADU


AND THE SUN WENT NOVA and humanity fragmented and fled; and such is the
self-knowledge of humankind that it knew it must guard its past as it
guarded its being, or it would cease to be human; and such was its pride
in itself that it made of its traditions a ritual and a standard.

The great dream was that wherever humanity settled, fragment by fragment
by fragment, however it lived, it would continue rather than begin
again, so that all through the Universe and the years, humans would be
humans, speaking as humans, thinking as humans, aspiring and progressing
as humans; and whenever human met human, no matter how different, how
distant, he would come in peace, meet his own kind, speak his own
tongue.

Humans, however, being humans—

Bril emerged near the pink star, disliking its light, and found the
fourth planet. It hung waiting for him like an exotic fruit. (And was it
ripe, and could he ripen it? And what if it were poison?) He left his
machine in orbit and descended in a bubble. A young savage watched him
come and waited by a waterfall.

“Earth was my mother,” said Bril from the bubble. It was the formal
greeting of all humankind, spoken in the Old Tongue.

“And my father,” said the savage, in an atrocious accent.

Watchfully, Bril emerged from the bubble, but stood very close by it. He
completed his part of the ritual. “I respect the disparity of our wants,
as individuals, and greet you.”

“I respect the identity of our needs, as humans, and greet you. I am
Wonyne,” said the youth, “son of Tanyne, of the Senate, and Nina. This
place is Xanadu, the fourth planet.”

“I am Bril of Kit Carson, second planet of the Sumner System, and a
member of the Sole Authority,” said the newcomer, adding, “and I come in
peace.”

He waited then, to see if the savage would discard any weapons he might
have, according to historic protocol. Wonyne did not; he apparently had
none. He wore only a cobwebby tunic and a broad belt made of flat,
black, brilliantly polished stones and could hardly have concealed so
much as a dart. Bril waited yet another moment, watching the untroubled
face of the savage, to see if Wonyne suspected anything of the arsenal
hidden in the sleek black uniform, the gleaming jackboots, the metal
gauntlets.

Wonyne said only, “Then, in peace, welcome.” He smiled. “Come with me to
Tanyne’s house and mine, and be refreshed.”

“You say Tanyne, your father, is a Senator? Is he active now? Could he
help me to reach your center of government?”

The youth paused, his lips moving slightly, as if he were translating
the dead language into another tongue. Then, “Yes. Oh, yes.”

Bril flicked his left gauntlet with his right fingertips and the bubble
sprang away and up, where at length it would join the ship until it was
needed. Wonyne was not amazed—probably, thought Bril, because it was
beyond his understanding.

Bril followed the youth up a winding path past a wonderland of flowering
plants, most of them purple, some white, a few scarlet, and all jeweled
by the waterfall. The higher reaches of the path were flanked by thick
soft grass, red as they approached, pale pink as they passed.

Bril’s narrow black eyes flicked everywhere, saw and recorded
everything: the easy-breathing boy springing up the slope ahead, and the
constant shifts of color in his gossamer garment as the wind touched it;
the high trees, some of which might conceal a man or a weapon; the rock
outcroppings and what oxides they told of; the birds he could see and
the bird-songs he heard which might be something else.

He was a man who missed only the obvious, and there is so little that is
obvious.

Yet he was not prepared for the house; he and the boy were halfway
across the park-like land which surrounded it before he recognized it as
such.

It seemed to have no margins. It was here high and there only a place
between flower beds; yonder a room became a terrace, and elsewhere a
lawn was a carpet because there was a roof over it. The house was
divided into areas rather than rooms, by open grilles and by
arrangements of color. Nowhere was there a wall. There was nothing to
hide behind and nothing that could be locked. All the land, all the sky,
looked into and through the house, and the house was one great window on
the world.

Seeing it, Bril felt a slight shift in his opinion of the natives. His
feeling was still one of contempt, but now he added suspicion. A
cardinal dictum on humans as he knew them was: _Every man has something
to hide_. Seeing a mode of living like this did not make him change his
dictum: he simply increased he watchfulness, asking: _How do they hide
it?_

“Tan! Tan!” the boy was shouting. “I’ve brought a friend!”

A man and a woman strolled toward them from a garden. The man was huge,
but otherwise so like the youth Wonyne that there could be no question
of their relationship. Both had long, narrow, clear gray eyes set very
wide apart, and red—almost orange—hair. The noses were strong and
delicate at the same time, their mouths thin-lipped but wide and
good-natured.

But the woman—

It was a long time before Bril could let himself look, let himself
believe that there was such a woman. After his first glance, he made of
her only a presence and fed himself small nibbles of belief in his eyes,
in the fact that there could be hair like that, face, voice, body. She
was dressed, like her husband and the boy, in the smoky kaleidoscope
which resolved itself, when the wind permitted, into a black-belted
tunic.

“He is Bril of Kit Carson in the Sumner System,” babbled the boy, “and
he’s a member of the Sole Authority and it’s the second planet and he
knew the greeting and got it right. So did I,” he added, laughing. “This
is Tanyne, of the Senate, and my mother Nina.”

“You are welcome, Bril of Kit Carson,” she said to him; and unbelieving
in this way that had come upon him, he took away his gaze and inclined
his head.

“You must come in,” said Tanyne cordially, and led the way through an
arbor which was not the separate arch it appeared to be, but an
entrance.

The room was wide, wider at one end than the other, though it was hard
to determine by how much. The floor was uneven, graded upward toward one
corner, where it was a mossy bank. Scattered here and there were what
the eye said were white and striated gray boulders; the hand would say
they were flesh. Except for a few shelf and table-like niches on these
and in the bank, they were the only furniture.

Water ran frothing and gurgling through the room; apparently as an open
brook; but Bril saw Nina’s bare foot tread on the invisible covering
that followed it down to the pool at the other end. The pool was the one
he had seen from outside, indeterminately in and out of the house. A
large tree grew by the pool and leaned its heavy branches toward the
bank; evidently its wide-flung limbs were webbed and tented between by
the same invisible substance which covered the brook. These branches
formed the only overhead cover; yet, to the ear, it felt like a ceiling.

The whole effect was, to Bril, intensely depressing, and he surprised
himself with a flash of homesickness for the tall steel cities of his
home planet.

Nina smiled and left them. Bril followed his host’s example and sank
down on the ground, or floor, where it became a bank, or wall. Inwardly,
Bril rebelled at the lack of decisiveness, of discipline, of clear-cut
limitation inherent in such haphazard design as this. But he was
well-trained and quite prepared, at first, to keep his feelings to
himself among barbarians.

“Nina will join us in a moment,” said Tanyne.

Bril, who had been watching the woman’s swift movements across the
courtyard through the transparent wall opposite, controlled a start. “I
am unused to your ways, and wondered what she was doing,” he said.

“She is preparing a meal for you,” explained Tanyne.

“Herself?”

Tanyne and his son gazed wonderingly. “Does that seem unusual to you?”

“I understood the lady was wife to a Senator,” said Bril. It seemed
adequate as an explanation, but only to him. He looked from the boy’s
face to the man’s. “Perhaps I understand something different when I use
the term ‘Senator.’ ”

“Perhaps you do. Would you tell us what a Senator is on the planet Kit
Carson?”

“He is a member of the Senate, subservient to the Sole Authority, and in
turn leader of a free Nation.”

“And his wife?”

“His wife shares his privileges. She might serve a member of the Sole
Authority, but hardly anyone else—certainly not an unidentified
stranger.”

“Interesting,” said Tanyne, while the boy murmured the astonishment he
had not expressed at Bril’s bubble, or Bril himself. “Tell me, have you
not identified yourself, then?”

“He did, by the waterfall,” the youth insisted.

“I gave you no proof,” said Bril stiffly. He watched father and son
exchange a glance. “Credentials, written authority.” He touched the flat
pouch hung on his power belt.

Wonyne asked ingenuously, “Do the credentials say you are _not_ Bril of
Kit Carson in the Sumner System?”

Bril frowned at him, and Tanyne said gently, “Wonyne, take care.” To
Bril, he said, “Surely there are many differences between us, as there
always are between different worlds. But I am certain of this one
similarity: the young at times run straight where wisdom has built a
winding path.”

Bril sat silently and thought this out. It was probably some sort of
apology, he decided, and gave a single sharp nod. Youth, he thought, was
an attenuated defect here. A boy Wonyne’s age would be a soldier on
Carson, ready for a soldier’s work, and no one would be apologizing for
him. Nor would he be making blunders. _None!_

He said, “These credentials are for your officials when I meet with
them. By the way, when can that be?”

Tanyne shrugged his wide shoulders. “Whenever you like.”

“The sooner the better.”

“Very well.”

“Is it far?”

Tanyne seemed perplexed. “Is what far?”

“Your capital, or wherever it is your Senate meets.”

“Oh, I see. It doesn’t meet, in the sense you mean. It is always in
session, though, as they used to say. We—”

He compressed his lips and made a liquid, bisyllabic sound. Then he
laughed. “I do beg your pardon,” he said warmly. “The Old Tongue lacks
certain words, certain concepts. What is your word
for—er—the-presence-of-all-in-the-presence-of-one?”

“I think,” said Bril carefully, “that we had better go back to the
subject at hand. Are you saying that your Senate does not meet in some
official place, at some appointed time?”

“I—” Tan hesitated, then nodded. “Yes, that is true as far as it—”

“And there is no possibility of my addressing your Senate in person?”

“I didn’t say that.” Tan tried twice to express the thought, while
Bril’s eyes slowly narrowed. Tan suddenly burst into laughter. “Using
the Old Tongue to tell old tales and to speak with a friend are two
different things,” he said ruefully. “I wish you would learn our speech.
Would you, do you suppose? It is rational and well-based on what you
know. Surely you have another language besides the Old Tongue on Kit
Carson?”

“I honor the Old Tongue,” said Bril stiffly, dodging the question.
Speaking very slowly, as if to a retarded child, he said, “I should like
to know when I may be taken to those in authority here, in order to
discuss certain planetary and interplanetary matters with them.”

“Discuss them with me.”

“You are a Senator,” Bril said, in a tone which meant very clearly: _You
are only a Senator_.

“True,” said Tanyne.

With forceful patience, Bril asked, “And what is a Senator here?”

“A contact point between the people of his district and the people
everywhere. One who knows the special problems of a small section of the
planet and can relate them to planetary policy.”

“And whom does the Senate serve?”

“The people,” said Tanyne, as if he had been asked to repeat himself.

“Yes, yes, of course. And who, then, serves the Senate?”

“The Senators.”

Bril closed his eyes and barely controlled the salty syllable which
welled up inside him. “Who,” he inquired steadily, “is your Government?”

The boy had been watching them eagerly, alternately, like a devotee at
some favorite fast ball game. Now he asked, “What’s a Government?”

Nina’s interruption at that point was most welcome to Bril. She came
across the terrace from the covered area where she had been doing
mysterious things at a long work-surface in the garden. She carried an
enormous tray—guided it, rather, as Bril saw when she came closer. She
kept three fingers under the tray and one behind it, barely touching it
with her palm. Either the transparent wall of the room disappeared as
she approached, or she passed through a section where there was none.

“I do hope you find something to your taste among these,” she said
cheerfully, as she brought the tray down to a hummock near Bril. “This
is flesh of birds, this of small mammals, and, over here, fish. These
cakes are made of four kinds of grain, and the white cakes here of just
one, the one we call milk-wheat. Here is water, and these two are wines,
and this one is a distilled spirit we call warm-ears.”

Bril, keeping his eyes on the food, and trying to keep his universe from
filling up with the sweet fresh scent of her as she bent over him, so
near, said, “This is welcome.”

She crossed to her husband and sank down at his feet, leaning back
against his legs. He twisted her heavy hair gently in his fingers and
she flashed a small smile up at him. Bril looked from the food, colorful
as a corsage, here steaming, there gathering frost from the air, to the
three smiling expectant faces, and did not know what to do.

“Yes, this is welcome,” he said again, and still they sat there,
watching him. He picked up the white cake and rose, looked out and
around, into the house, through it and beyond. Where could one go in
such a place?

Steam from the tray touched his nostrils and saliva filled his mouth. He
was hungry, but …

He sighed, sat down, gently replaced the cake. He tried to smile and
could not.

“Does none of it please you?” asked Nina, concerned.

“I can’t eat here!” said Bril; then, sensing something in the natives
that had not been there before, he added, “thank you.” Again he looked
at their controlled faces. He said to Nina, “It is very well-prepared
and good to look on.”

“Then eat,” she invited, smiling again.

This did something that their house, their garments, their appallingly
easy ways—sprawling all over the place, letting their young speak up at
will, the shameless admission that they had a patois of their own—that
none of these things had been able to do. Without losing his implacable
dignity by any slightest change of expression, he yet found himself
blushing. Then he scowled and let the childish display turn to a flush
of anger. He would be glad, he thought furiously, when he had the heart
of this culture in the palm of his hand, to squeeze when he willed; then
there would be an end to these hypocritical amenities and they would
learn who could be humiliated.

But these three faces, the boy’s so open and unconscious of wrong,
Tanyne’s so strong and anxious for him, Nina—that face, that face of
Nina’s—they were all utterly guileless. He must not let them know of his
embarrassment. If they had planned it, he must not give them the
satisfaction. If they had not planned it, he must not let them suspect
his vulnerability.

With an immense effort of will, he kept his voice low; still, it was
harsh. “I think,” he said slowly, “that we on Kit Carson regard the
matter of privacy perhaps a little more highly than you do.”

They exchanged an astonished look, and then comprehension dawned visibly
on Tanyne’s ruddy face. “You don’t eat together!”

Bril did not shudder, but it was in his word: “No.”

“Oh,” said Nina, “I’m _so_ sorry!”

Bril thought it wise not to discover exactly what she was sorry about.

He said, “No matter. Customs differ. I shall eat when I am alone.”

“Now that we understand,” said Tanyne, “go ahead. Eat.”

But they _sat_ there!

“Oh,” said Nina, “I wish you spoke our other language; it would be so
easy to explain!” She leaned forward to him, put out her arms, as if she
could draw meaning itself from the air and cast it over him. “Please try
to understand, Bril. You are very mistaken about one thing—we honor
privacy above almost anything else.”

“We don’t mean the same thing when we say it,” said Bril.

“It means aloneness with oneself, doesn’t it? It means to do things,
think or make or just be, without intrusion.”

“Unobserved,” said Bril.

“So?” replied Wonyne happily, throwing out both hands in a gesture that
said _quod erat demonstrandum_. “Go on then—eat! We won’t look!” and
helped the situation not at all.

“Wonyne’s right,” chuckled the father, “but as usual, a little too
direct. He means we can’t look, Bril. If you want privacy, _we can’t see
you_.”

Angry, reckless, Bril suddenly reached to the tray. He snatched up a
goblet, the one she had indicated as water, thumbed a capsule out of his
belt, popped it into his mouth, drank and swallowed. He banged the
goblet back on the tray and shouted, “Now you’ve seen all you’re going
to see.”

With an indescribable expression, Nina drifted upward to her feet, bent
like a dancer and touched the tray. It lifted and she guided it away
across the courtyard.

“All right,” said Wonyne. It was precisely as if someone had spoken and
he had acknowledged. He lounged out, following his mother. What _had_
been on her face? Something she could not contain; something rising to
that smooth surface, about to reveal outlines, break through … anger?
Bril hoped so. Insult? He could, he supposed, understand that.
But—laughter? _Don’t make it laughter_, something within him pleaded.

“Bril,” said Tanyne.

For the second time, he was so lost in contemplation of the woman that
Tanyne’s voice made him start.

“What is it?”

“If you will tell me what arrangements you would like for eating, I’ll
see to it that you get them.”

“You wouldn’t know how,” said Bril bluntly. He threw his sharp, cold
gaze across the room and back. “You people don’t build walls you can’t
see through, doors you can close.”

“Why, no, we don’t.” As always, the giant left the insult and took only
the words.

_I bet you don’t_, Bril said silently, _not even for_—and a horrible
suspicion began to grow within him. “We of Kit Carson feel that all
human history and development are away from the animal, toward something
higher. We are, of course, chained to the animal state, but we do what
we can to eliminate every animal act as a public spectacle.” Sternly, he
waved a shining gauntlet at the great open house. “You have apparently
not reached such a idealization. I have seen how you eat; doubtless you
perform your other functions so openly.”

“Oh, yes,” said Tanyne. “But with this—” he pointed—“it’s hardly the
same thing.”

“With what?”

Tanyne again indicated one of the boulderlike objects. He tore off a
clump of moss—it was real moss—and tossed it to the soft surface of one
of the boulders. He reached down and touched one of the gray streaks.
The moss sank into the surface the way a pebble will in quicksand, but
much faster.

“It will not accept living animal matter above a certain level of
complexity,” he explained, “but it instantly absorbs every molecule of
anything else, not only on the surface but for a distance above.”

“And that’s a—a—where you—”

Tan nodded and said that that was exactly what it was.

“But—anyone can _see_ you!”

Tan shrugged and smiled. “How? That’s what I meant when I said it’s
hardly the same thing. Of eating, we make a social occasion. But this—”
he threw another clump of moss and watched it vanish—“just isn’t
observed.” His sudden laugh rang out and again he said, “I _wish_ you’d
learn the language. Such a thing is so easy to express.”

But Bril was concentrating on something else. “I appreciate your
hospitality,” he said, using the phrase stiltedly, “but I’d like to be
moving on.” He eyed the boulder distastefully. “And very soon.”

“As you wish. You have a message for Xanadu. Deliver it, then.”

“To your Government.”

“To our Government. I told you before, Bril—when you’re ready, proceed.”

“I cannot believe that you alone represent this planet!”

“Neither can I,” said Tanyne pleasantly. “I don’t. Through me, you can
speak to forty-one others, all Senators.”

“Is there no other way?”

Tanyne smiled. “Forty-one other ways. Speak to any of the others. It
amounts to the same thing.”

“And no higher government body?”

Tanyne reached out a long arm and plucked a goblet from a niche in the
moss bank. It was chased crystal with a luminous metallic rim.

“Finding the highest point of the government of Xanadu is like finding
the highest point on this,” he said. He ran a finger around the inside
of the rim and the goblet chimed beautifully.

“Pretty unstable,” growled Bril.

Tanyne made it sing again and replaced it; whether that was an answer or
not, Bril could not know.

He snorted, “No wonder the boy didn’t know what Government was.”

“We don’t use the term,” said Tanyne. “We don’t need it. There are few
things here that a citizen can’t handle for himself; I wish I could show
you how few. If you’ll live with us a while, I will show you.”

He caught Bril’s eye squarely as it returned from another disgusted and
apprehensive trip to the boulder, and laughed outright. But the kindness
in his voice as he went on quenched Bril’s upsurge of indignant fury,
and a little question curled up: _Is he managing me?_ But there wasn’t
time to look at it.

“Can your business wait until you know us, Bril? I tell you now, there
is no centralized Government here, almost no government at all; we of
the Senate are advisory. I tell you, too, that to speak to one Senator
is to speak to all, and that you may do it now, this minute, or a year
from now—whenever you like. I am telling you the truth and you may
accept it or you may spend months, years, traveling this planet and
checking up on me; you’ll always come out with the same answer.”

Noncommittally, Bril said, “How do I know that what I tell you is
accurately relayed to the others?”

“It isn’t relayed,” said Tan frankly. “We all hear it simultaneously.”

“Some sort of radio?”

Tan hesitated, then nodded. “Some sort of radio.”

“I won’t learn your language,” Bril said abruptly. “I can’t live as you
do. If you can accept those conditions, I will stay a short while.”

“Accept? We _insist!_” Tanyne bounded cheerfully to the niche where the
goblet stood and held his palm up. A large, opaque sheet of a shining
white material rolled down and stopped. “Draw with your finger,” he
said.

“Draw? Draw what?”

“A place of your own. How you would like to live, eat, sleep,
everything.”

“I don’t require very much. None of us on Kit Carson do.”

He pointed the finger of his gauntlet like a weapon, made a couple of
dabs in the corner of the screen to test the line, and then dashed off a
very credible parallelepiped. “Talking my height as one unit, I’d want
this one-and-a-half long, one-and-a-quarter high. Slit vents at eye
level, one at each end, two on each side, screened against insects—”

“We have no preying insects,” said Tanyne.

“Screened anyway, and with as near an unbreakable mesh as you have. Here
a hook suitable for hanging a garment. Here a bed, flat, hard, with firm
padding as thick as my hand, one-and-one-eighth units long, one-third
wide. All sides under the bed enclosed and equipped as a locker,
impregnable, and to which only I have the key or combination. Here a
shelf one-third by one-quarter units, one-half unit off the floor,
suitable for eating from a seated posture.

“One of—those, if it’s self-contained and reliable,” he said edgily,
casting a thumb at the boulderlike convenience. “The whole structure to
be separate from all others on high ground and overhung by nothing—no
trees, no cliffs, with approaches clear and visible from all sides; as
strong as speed permits; and equipped with a light I can turn off and a
door that only I can unlock.”

“Very well,” said Tanyne easily. “Temperature?”

“The same as this spot now.”

“Anything else? Music? Pictures? We have some fine moving—”

Bril, from the top of his dignity, snorted his most eloquent snort.
“Water, if you can manage it. As to those other things, this is a
dwelling, not a pleasure palace.”

“I hope you will be comfortable in this—in it,” said Tanyne, with barely
a trace of sarcasm.

“It is precisely what I am used to,” Bril answered loftily.

“Come, then.”

“What?”

The big man waved him on and passed through the arbor. Bril, blinking in
the late pink sunlight, followed him.

On the gentle slope above the house, halfway between it and the
mountaintop beyond, was a meadow of the red grass Bril had noticed on
his way from the waterfall. In the center of this meadow was a crowd of
people, bustling like moths around a light, their flimsy, colorful
clothes flashing and gleaming in a thousand shades. And in the middle of
the crowd lay a coffin-shaped object.

Bril could not believe his eyes, then stubbornly would not, and at last,
as they came near, yielded and admitted to himself: this was the
structure he had just sketched.

He walked more and more slowly as the wonder of it grew on him. He
watched the people—children, even—swarming around and over the little
building, sealing the edge between roof and wall with a humming device,
laying screen on the slit-vents. A little girl, barely a toddler, came
up to him fearlessly and in lisping Old Tongue asked for his hand, which
she clapped to a tablet she carried.

“To make your keys,” explained Tanyne, watching the child scurry off to
a man waiting at the door.

He took the tablet and disappeared inside, and they could see him kneel
by the bed. A young boy overtook them and ran past, carrying a sheet of
the same material the roof and walls were made of. It seemed light, but
its slightly rough, pale-tan surface gave an impression of great
toughness. As they drew up at the door, they saw the boy take the
material and set it in position between the end of the bed and the
doorway. He aligned it carefully, pressing it against the wall, and
struck it once with the heel of his hand, and there was Bril’s required
table, level, rigid, and that without braces or supports.

“You seemed to like the looks of some of this, anyway.” It was Nina,
with her tray. She floated it to the new table, waved cheerfully and
left.

“With you in a moment,” Tan called, adding three singing syllables in
the Xanadu tongue which were, Bril concluded, an endearment of some
kind; they certainly sounded like it. Tan turned back to him, smiling.

“Well, Bril, how is it?”

Bril could only ask, “Who gave the orders?”

“You did,” said Tan, and there didn’t seem to be any answer to that.

Already, through the open door, he could see the crowd drifting away,
laughing and singing their sweet language to each other. He saw a young
man scoop up scarlet flowers from the pink sward and hand them to a
smiling girl, and unaccountably the scene annoyed him. He turned away
abruptly and went about the walls, thumping them and peering through the
vents. Tanyne knelt by the bed, his big shoulders bulging as he tugged
at the locker. It might as well have been solid rock.

“Put your hand there,” he said, pointing, and Bril clapped his gauntlet
to the plate he indicated.

Sliding panels parted. Bril got down and peered inside. It had its own
light, and he could see the buff-colored wall of the structure at the
back and the heavy, filleted partition which formed the bed uprights. He
touched the panel again and the doors slid silently shut, so tight that
he could barely see their meeting.

“The door’s the same,” said Tanyne. “No one but you can open it. Here’s
water. You didn’t say where to put it. If this is inconvenient …”

When Bril put his hand near the spigot, water flowed into a catch basin
beneath. “No, that is satisfactory. They work like specialists.”

“They are,” said Tanyne.

“Then they have built such a strange structure before?”

“Never.”

Bril looked at him sharply. This ingenuous barbarian surely could not be
making a fool of him by design! No, this must be some slip of semantics,
some shift in meaning over the years which separated each of them from
the common ancestor. He would not forget it, but he set it aside for
future thought.

“Tanyne,” he asked suddenly, “how many are you in Xanadu?”

“In the district, three hundred. On the planet, twelve, almost thirteen
thousand.”

“We are one and a half billion,” said Bril. “And what is your largest
city?”

“City,” said Tanyne, as if searching through the files of his memory.
“Oh—city! We have none. There are forty-two districts like this one,
some larger, some smaller.”

“Your entire planetary population could be housed in one building within
one city on Kit Carson. And how many generations have your people been
here?”

“Thirty-two, thirty-five, something like that.”

“We settled Kit Carson not quite six Earth centuries ago. In point of
time, then, it would seem that yours is the older culture. Wouldn’t you
be interested in how we have been able to accomplish so much more?”

“Fascinated,” said Tanyne.

“You have some clever little handicrafts here,” Bril mused, “and a quite
admirable cooperative ability. You could make a formidable thing of this
world, if you wanted to, and if you had the proper guidance.”

“Oh, could we really?” Tanyne seemed very pleased.

“I must think,” said Bril somberly. “You are not what I—what I had
supposed. Perhaps I shall stay a little longer than I had planned.
Perhaps while I am learning about your people, you in turn could be
learning about mine.”

“Delighted,” said Tanyne. “Now is there anything else you need?”

“Nothing. You may leave me.”

His autocratic tone gained him only one of the big man’s pleasant,
open-faced smiles. Tanyne waved his hand and left. Bril heard him
calling his wife in ringing baritone notes, and her glad answer. He set
his mailed hand against the door plate and it slid shut silently.

_Now what,_ he asked himself, _got me to do all that bragging? Then the
astonishment at the people of Xanadu rose up and answered the question
for him. What manner of people are specialists at something they have
never done before?_

He got out his stiff, polished, heavy uniform, his gauntlets, his boots.
They were all wired together, power supply in the boots, controls and
computers in the trousers and belt, sensory mechs in the tunic,
projectors and field loci in the gloves.

He hung the clothes on the hook provided and set the alarm field for
anything larger than a mouse any closer than thirty meters. He dialed a
radiation dome to cover his structure and exclude all spy beams or
radiation weapons. Then he swung his left gauntlet on its cable over to
the table and went to work on one small corner.

In half an hour, he had found a combination of heat and pressure that
would destroy the pale brown board, and he sat down on the edge of the
bed, limp with amazement. You could build a spaceship with stuff like
this.

Now he had to believe that they had it in stock sizes exactly to his
specifications, which would mean warehouses and manufacturing facilities
capable of making up those and innumerable other sizes; or he had to
believe that they had machinery capable of making what his torches had
just destroyed, in job lots, right now.

But they didn’t have any industrial plant to speak of, and if they had
warehouses, they had them where the Kit Carson robot scouts had been
unable to detect them in their orbiting for the last fifty years.

Slowly he lay down to think.

To acquire a planet, you locate the central government. If it is an
autocracy, organized tightly up to the peak, so much the better; the
peak is small and you kill it or control it and use the organization. If
there is no government at all, you recruit the people or you exterminate
them. If there is a plant, you run it with overseers and make the
natives work it until you can train your own people to it and eliminate
the natives. If there are skills, you learn them or you control those
who have them. All in the book; a rule for every eventuality, every
possibility.

But what if, as the robots reported, there was high technology and no
plant? Planetwide cultural stability and almost no communications?

Well, nobody ever heard of such a thing, so when the robots report it,
you send an investigator. All he has to find out is how they do it. All
he has to do is to parcel up what is to be kept and what eliminated when
the time comes for an expeditionary force.

There’s always one clean way out, thought Bril, putting his hands behind
his head and looking up at the tough ceiling. Item, one Earth-normal
planet, rich in natural resources, sparsely populated by innocents. You
can always simply exterminate them.

But not before you find out how they communicate, how they cooperate,
and how they specialize in skills they never tried before. How they
manufacture superior materials out of thin air in no time.

He had a sudden heady vision of Kit Carson equipped as these people
were, a billion and a half universal specialists with some heretofore
unsuspected method of intercommunication, capable of building cities,
fighting wars, with the measureless skill and split-second understanding
and obedience with which this little house had been built.

No, these people must not be exterminated. They must be used. Kit Carson
had to learn their tricks. If the tricks were—he hoped not!—inherent in
Xanadu and beyond the Carson abilities, then what would be the next best
thing?

Why, a cadre of the Xanadu, scattered through the cities and armies of
Kit Carson, instantly trainable. Instruct one and you teach them all;
each could teach a group of Kit Carson’s finest. Production, logistics,
strategy, tactics—he saw it all in a flash.

Xanadu might be left almost exactly as is, except for its new
export—aides de camp.

_Dreams, these are only dreams, he told himself sternly. Wait until you
know more. Watch them make impregnable hardboard and anti-grav tea
trays …_

The thought of the tea-tray made his stomach growl. He got up and went
to it. The hot food steams, the cold was still frosty and firm. He
picked, he tasted. Then he bit. Then he gobbled.

Nina, that Nina …

No, they can’t be exterminated, he thought drowsily, not when they can
produce such a woman. In all of Kit Carson, there wasn’t a cook like
that.

He lay down again and dreamed, and dreamed until he fell asleep.

They were completely frank. They showed him everything, and it
apparently never occurred to them to ask him why he wanted to know.
Asking was strange, because they seemed to lack that special pride of
accomplishment one finds in the skilled potter, metalworker,
electronician, an attitude of “Isn’t it remarkable that I can do it!”
They gave information accurately but impersonally, as if anyone could do
it.

And on Xanadu, anyone could.

At first, it seemed to Bril totally disorganized. These attractive
people in their indecent garments came and went, mingling play and work
and loafing, without apparent plan. But their play would take them
through a flower-garden just where the weeds were, and they would take
the weeds along. There seemed to be a group of girls playing jacks right
outside the place they would suddenly be needed to sort some seeds.

Tanyne tried to explain it: “Say we have a shortage of something—oh,
strontium, for example. The shortage itself creates a sort of vacuum.
People without anything special to do feel it; they think about
strontium. They come, they gather it.”

“But I have seen no mines,” Bril said puzzledly. “And what about
shipping? Suppose the shortage is here and the mines in another
district?”

“That never happens any more. Where there are deposits, of course, there
are no shortages. Where there are none, we find other ways, either to
use something else, or to produce it without mines.”

“Transmute it?”

“Too much trouble. No, we breed a fresh-water shellfish with a strontium
carbonate shell instead of calcium carbonate. The children gather them
for us when we need it.”

He saw their clothing industry—part shed, part cave, part forest glen.
There was a pool there where the young people swam, and a field where
they sunned themselves. Between times, they went into the shadows and
worked by a huge vessel where chemicals occasionally boiled, turned
bright green, and then precipitated. The black precipitate was raised
from the bottom of the vessel on screens, dumped into forms and pressed.

Just how the presses—little more than lids for the forms—operated, the
Old Tongue couldn’t tell him, but in four or five seconds the
precipitate had turned into the black stones used in their belts, formed
and polished, with a chemical formula in Old Tongue script cut into the
back of the left buckle.

“One of our few superstitions,” said Tanyne. “It’s the formula for the
belts—even a primitive chemistry could make them. We would like to see
them copied, duplicated all over the Universe. They are what we are.
Wear one, Bril. You would be one of us, then.”

Bril snorted in embarrassed contempt and went to watch two children
deftly making up the belts, as easily, and with the same idle pleasure,
as they might be making flower necklaces in a minute or two. As each was
assembled, the child would strike it against his own belt. All the
colors there are would appear each time this happened, in a brief,
brilliant, cool flare. Then the belt, now with a short trim of vague
tongued light, was tossed in a bin.

Probably the only time Bril permitted himself open astonishment on
Xanadu was the first time he saw one of the natives put on this garment.
It was a young man, come dripping from the pool. He snatched up a belt
from the bank and clasped it around his waist, and immediately color and
substance flowed up and down, a flickering, changing collar for him, a
moving coruscant kilt.

“It’s alive, you see,” said Tanyne. “Rather, it is not non-living
matter.”

He put his fingers under the hem of his own kilt and forced his fingers
up and outward. They penetrated the fabric, which fluttered away—untorn.

“It is not,” he said gravely, “altogether material, if you will forgive
an Old Tongue pun. The nearest Old Tongue term for it is ‘aura.’
Anyways, it lives, in its way. It maintains itself for—oh, a year or
more. Then dip it in lactic acid and it is refreshed again. And just on
of them could activate a million belts or a billion—how many sticks can
a fire burn?”

“But why wear such a thing?”

Tanyne laughed. “Modesty.” He laughed again. “A scholar of the very old
times, on Earth before the Nova, passed on to me the words of one
Rudofsky: “Modesty is not so simple a virtue as honesty.” We wear these
because they are warm when we need warmth, and because they conceal some
defects some of the time—surely all one can ask of any human
affectation.”

“They are certainly not modest,” said Bril stiffly.

“They express modesty just to the extent that they make us more pleasant
to look at with than without them. What more public expression of
humility could you want than that?”

Bril turned his back on Tanyne and the discussion. He understood
Tanyne’s words and ways imperfectly to begin with, and this kind of talk
left him bewildered, or unreached, or both.

He found out about the hardboard. Hanging from the limb of a tree was a
large vat of milky fluid—the paper, Tan explained, of a wasp they had
developed, dissolved in one of the nucleic acids which they synthesized
from a native weed. Under the vat was a flat metal plate and a set of
movable fences. These were arranged in the desired shape and thickness
of the finished panel, and then a cock was opened and the fluid ran in
and filled the enclosure. Thereupon two small children pushed a roller
by hand across the top of the fences. The white lake of fluid turned
pale brown and solidified, and that was the hardboard.

Tanyne tried his best to explain to Bril about that roller, but the Old
Tongue joined forces with Bril’s technical ignorance and made the
explanation incomprehensible. The coating of the roller was as simple in
design, and as complex in theory, as a transistor, and Bril had to let
it go at that, as he did with the selective analysis of the boulderlike
“plumbing” and the anti-grav food trays (which, he discovered, had to be
guided outbound, but which “homed” on the kitchen-area when empty).

He had less luck, as the days went by, in discovering the nature of the
skills of Xanadu. He had been quite ready to discard his own dream as a
fantasy, an impossibility—the strange idea that what any could do, all
could do. Tanyne tried to explain; at least, he answered every one of
Bril’s questions.

These wandering, indolent, joyful people could pick up anyone’s work at
any stage and carry it to any degree. One would pick up a flute and play
a few notes, and others would stroll over, some with instruments and
some without, and soon another instrument and another would join in,
until there were fifty or sixty and the music was like a passion or a
storm, or after-love or sleep when you think back on it.

And sometimes the bystanders would step forward and take an instrument
from the hands of someone who was tiring, and play one with all of the
rest, pure and harmonious; and, no, Tan would aver, he didn’t think
they’d ever played that particular piece of music before, those fifty or
sixty people.

It always got down to _feeling_, in Tan’s explanations.

“It’s a _feeling_ you get. The violin, now; I’ve heard one, we’ll say,
but never held one. I watch someone play and I understand how the notes
are made. Then I take it and do the same, and as I concentrate on making
the note, and the note that follows, it comes to me not only how it
should sound, but how it should _feel_—to the fingers, the bowing arm,
the chin and collarbone. Out of those feelings comes the feeling of how
it feels to be making such music.

“Of course, there are limitations,” he admitted, “and some might do
better than others. If my fingertips are soft, I can’t play as long as
another might. If a child’s hands are too small for the instrument,
he’ll have to drop an octave or skip a note. But the feeling’s there,
when we think in that certain way.

“It’s the same with anything else we do,” he summed up. “If I need
something in my house, a machine, a device, I won’t use iron where
copper is better; it wouldn’t _feel_ right for me. I don’t mean feeling
the metal with my hands; I mean thinking about the device and its parts
and what it’s for. When I think of all the things I could make it of,
there’s only one set of things that feels right to me.”

“So,” said Bril then. “And that, plus this—this competition between the
districts, to find all elements and raw materials in the neighborhood
instead of sending for them—that’s why you have no commerce. Yet you say
you’re standardized—at any rate, you all have the same kinds of devices,
ways of doing things.”

“We all have whatever we want and we make it ourselves, yes,” Tan
agreed.

In the evenings, Bril would sit in Tanyne’s house and listen to the
drift and swirl of conversation, or the floods of music, and wonder; and
then he would guide his tray back to his cubicle and lock the door and
eat, and brood. He felt at times that he was under an attack with
weapons he did not understand, on a field which was strange to him.

He remembered something Tanyne had said once, casually, about men and
their devices: “Ever since there were human beings, there has been
conflict between Man and his machines. They will run him or he them;
it’s hard to say which is the less disastrous way. But a culture which
is composed primarily of men has to destroy one made mostly of machines,
or be destroyed. It was always that way. We lost a culture once on
Xanadu. Did you ever wonder, Bril, why there are so few of us here? And
why almost all of us have red hair?”

Bril had, and had secretly blamed the small population on the shameless
lack of privacy, without which no human race seems able to whip up
enough interest in itself to breed readily.

“We were billions, once,” said Tan surprisingly. “We were wiped out.
Know how many were left? _Three!_”

That was a black night for Bril, when he realized how pitiable were his
efforts to learn their secret. For if a race were narrowed to a few, and
a mutation took place, and it then increased again, the new strain could
be present in all the new generations. He might as well, he thought, try
to wrest from them the secret of having red hair. That was the night he
concluded that these people would have to go; and it hurt him to think
that, and he was angry at himself for thinking so. That, too, was the
night of the ridiculous disaster.

He lay on his bed, grinding his teeth in helpless fury. It was past noon
and he had been there since he awoke, trapped by his own stupidity, and
ridiculous ridiculousness. His greatest single possession—his
dignity—was stripped from him by his own carelessness, by a fiendish and
unsportsmanlike gadget that—

His approach alarm hissed and he sprang to his feet in an agony of
embarrassment, in spite of the strong opaque walls and the door which
only he could open.

It was Tanyne; his friendly greeting bugled out and mingled with
birdsong and the wind. “Bril! You there?”

Bril let him come a little closer and then barked through the vent, “I’m
not coming out.” Tanyne stopped dead, and even Bril himself was
surprised by the harsh, squeezed sound of his voice.

“But Nina asked for you. She’s going to weave today; she thought you’d
like—”

“No,” snapped Bril. “Today I leave. Tonight, that is. I’ve summoned my
bubble. It will be here in two hours. After that, when it’s dark, I’m
going.”

“Bril, you can’t. Tomorrow I’ve set up a sintering for you; show you how
we plate—”

“No!”

“Have we offended you, Bril? Have I?”

“No,” Bril’s voice was surly, but at least not a shout.

“What’s happened?”

Bril didn’t answer.

Tanyne came closer. Bril’s eyes disappeared from the slit. He was
cowering against the wall, sweating.

Tanyne said, “Something’s happened, something’s wrong. I … feel it. You
know how I feel things, my friend, my good friend Bril.”

The very thought made Bril stiffen in terror. Did Tanyne know? Could he?

He might, at that. Bril damned these people and all their devices, their
planet and its sun and the fates which had brought him here.

“There is nothing in my world or in my experience you can’t tell me
about. You know I’ll understand,” Tanyne pleaded. He came closer. “Are
you ill? I have all the skills of the surgeons who have lived since the
Three. Let me in.”

“No!” It was hardly a word; it was an explosion.

Tanyne fell back a step. “I beg your pardon, Bril. I won’t ask again.
But—tell me. Please tell me. I must be able to help you!”

_All right,_ thought Bril, half hysterically, _I’ll tell you and you can
laugh your fool red head off. It won’t matter once we seed your planet
with Big Plague. “I can’t come out. I’ve ruined my clothes.”_

“Bril! What can that matter? Here, throw them out; we can fix them, no
matter what it is.”

“No!” He could just see what would happen with these universal talents
getting hold of the most compact and deadly armory this side of the
Sumner System.

“Then wear mine.” Tan put his hands to the belt of black stones.

“I wouldn’t be seen dead in a flimsy thing like that. Do you think I’m
an exhibitionist?”

With more heat (it wasn’t much) than Bril had ever seen in him, Tanyne
said, “You’ve been a lot more conspicuous in those winding sheets you’ve
been wearing than you ever would in this.”

Bril had never thought of that. He looked longingly at the bright
nothing which flowed up and down from the belt, and then at his own
black harness, humped up against the wall under its hook. He hadn’t been
able to bear the thought of putting them back on since the accident
happened, and he had not been this long without clothes since he’d been
too young to walk.

“What happened to your clothes, anyway?” Tan asked sympathetically.

_Laugh_, thought Bril, _and I’ll kill you right now and you’ll never
have a chance to see your race die_. “I sat down on the—I’ve been using
it as a chair; there’s only room for one seat in here. I must have
kicked the switch. I didn’t even feel it until I got up. The whole back
of my—” Angrily he blurted, “Why doesn’t that ever happen to you
people?”

“Didn’t I tell you?” Tan said, passing the news item by as if it meant
nothing. Well, to him it probably was nothing. “The unit only accepts
non-living matter.”

“Leave that thing you call clothes in front of the door,” Bril grunted
after a strained silence. “Perhaps I’ll try it.”

Tanyne tossed the belt up against the door and strode away, singing
softly. His voice was so big that even his soft singing seemed to go on
forever.

But eventually Bril had the field to himself, the birdsong and the wind.
He went to the door and away, lifted his seatless breeches sadly and
folded them out of sight under the other things on the hook. He looked
at the door again and actually whimpered once, very quietly. At last he
put the gauntlet against the doorplate, and the door, never designed to
open a little way, obediently slid wide. He squeaked, reached out,
caught up the belt, scampered back and slapped at the plate.

“No one saw,” he told himself urgently.

He pulled the belt around him. The buckle parts knew each other like a
pair of hands.

The first thing he was aware of was the warmth. Nothing but the belt
touched him anywhere and yet there was a warmth on him, soft, safe, like
a bird’s breast on eggs. A split second later, he gasped.

How could a mind fill so and not feel pressure? How could so much
understanding flood into a brain and not break it?

He understood about the roller which treated the hardboard; it was a
certain way and no other, and he could feel the rightness of that sole
conjecture.

He understood the ions of the mold-press that made the belts, and the
life-analog he wore as a garment. He understood how his finger might
write on a screen, and the vacuum of demand he might send out to have
this house built so, and so, and exactly so; and how the natives would
hurry to fill it.

He remembered without effort Tanyne’s description of the feel of playing
an instrument, making, building, molding, holding, sharing, and how it
must be to play in a milling crowd beside a task, moving randomly and
only for pleasure, yet taking someone’s place at vat or bench, furrow or
fishnet, the very second another laid down a tool.

He stood in his own quiet flame, in his little coffin-cubicle, looking
at his hands and knowing without question that they would build him a
model of a city on Kit Carson if he liked, or a statue of the soul of
the Sole Authority.

He knew without question that he had the skills of this people, and that
he could call on any of those skills just by concentrating on a task
until it came to him how the right way (for him) would _feel_. He knew
without surprise that these resources transcended even death; for a man
could have a skill and then it was everyman’s, and if the man should
die, his skill still lived in everyman.

_Just by concentrating_—that was the key, the keyway, the keystone to
the nature of this device. A device, that was all—no mutations, nothing
‘extra-sensory’ (whatever that meant); only a machine like other
machines. You have a skill, and a feeling about it; I have a task.
Concentration on my task sets up a demand for your skill; through the
living flame you wear, you transmit; through mine, I receive. Then I
perform; and what bias I put upon that performance depends on my
capabilities. Should I add something to that skill,then mine is the
higher, the more complete; the _feeling_ of it is better, and it is I
who will transmit next time there is a demand.

And he understood the authority that lay in this new aura, and it came
to him then how this home planet could be welded into a unit such as the
Universe had never seen. Xanadu had not done it, because Xanadu had
grown randomly with its gift, without the preliminary pounding and
shaping and milling of authority and discipline.

But Kit Carson! Carson with all skills and all talents shared among all
its people, and overall and commanding, creating that vacuum of need and
instant fulfillment, the Sole Authority and the State. It must be so
(even though, far down, something in him wondered why the State kept so
much understanding away from its people), for with this new depth came a
solemn new dedication to his home and all it stood for.

Trembling, he unbuckled the belt and turned back its left buckle. Yes,
there it was, the formula for the precipitate. And now he understood the
pressing processes and he had the flame to strike into new belts and
make them live—by the millions, Tanyne had said, the billions.

Tanyne had said … why had he never said that the garments of Xanadu were
the source of all their wonders and perplexities?

But had Bril ever asked?

Hadn’t Tanyne begged him to take a garment so he could be one with
Xanadu? The poor earnest idiot, to think he could be swayed away from
Carson this way! Well, then, Tanyne and his people would have an offer,
too, and it would all be even; soon they could, if they would, join the
shining armies of a new Kit Carson.

From his hanging black suit, a chime sounded. Bril laughed and gathered
up his old harness and all the fire and shock and paralysis asleep in
its mighty, compact weapons. He slapped open the door and sprang to the
bubble which waited outside, and flung his old uniform in to lie
crumpled on the floor, a broken chrysalis. Shining and exultant, he
leaped in after it and the bubble sprang away skyward.

Within a week after Bril’s return to Kit Carson in the Sumner System,
the garment had been duplicated, and duplicated again, and tested.

Within a month, nearly two hundred thousand had been distributed, and
eighty factories were producing round the clock.

Within a year, the whole planet, all the millions, were shining and
unified as never before, moving together under their Leader’s will like
the cells of a hand.

And then, in shocking unison, they all flickered and dimmed, every one,
so it was time for the lactic acid dip which Bril had learned of. It was
done in panic, without test or hesitation; a small taste of this
luminous subjection had created a mighty appetite. All was well for a
week—

And then, as the designers in Xanadu had planned, all the other segments
of the black belts joined the first meager two in full operation.

A billion and a half human souls, who had been given the techniques of
music and the graphic arts, and the theory of technology, now had the
others: philosophy and logic and love; sympathy, empathy, forbearance,
unity in the idea of their species rather than in their obedience;
membership in harmony with all life everywhere.

A people with such feelings and their derived skills cannot be slaves.
As the light burst upon them, there was only one concentration possible
to each of them—to be free, and the accomplished feeling of being free.
As each found it, he was an expert in freedom, and expert succeeded
expert, transcended expert, until (in a moment) a billion and a half
human souls had no greater skill than the talent of freedom.

So Kit Carson, as a culture, ceased to exist, and something new started
there and spread through the stars nearby.

And because Bril knew what a Senator was and wanted to be one, he became
one.

In each other’s arms, Tanyne and Nina were singing softly, when the
goblet in the mossy niche chimed.

“Here comes another one,” said Wonyne, crouched at their feet. “I wonder
what will make _him_ beg, borrow, or steal a belt.”

“Doesn’t matter,” said Tanyne, stretching luxuriously, “as long as he
gets it. Which one is he, Wo—that noisy mechanism on the other side of
the small moon?”

“No,” said Wonyne. “That one’s still sitting there squalling and
thinking we don’t know it’s there. No, this is the force-field that’s
been hovering over Fleetwing District for the last two years.”

Tanyne laughed. “That’ll make conquest number eighteen for us.”

“Nineteen,” corrected Nina dreamily. “I remember because eighteen was
the one that just left and seventeen was that funny little Bril from the
Sumner System. Tan, for a time that little man loved me.” But that was a
small thing and did not matter.



THE CLAUSTROPHILE


“PASS MR. MAGRUDER the _hominy_, Chris!” His mother’s mild, tired voice
at last penetrated. “For pity’s sakes, son, how many times—”

But Tess Milburn came to his rescue, reaching a thin arm, a sallow hand,
to the dish of grits and passing it down to the boarder. Mr. Magruder
didn’t say anything. He never said anything. He never ate hominy grits,
either, but that wasn’t the point. When Miz Binns set out the dinner,
everything had to be passed to everybody, no matter what.

Chris sighed and mumbled he was sorry. He let his mind drift back to the
three-body problem. He knew he couldn’t solve the three-body problem,
but he couldn’t be satisfied that it was impossible. Chris Binns was a
computer mechanic, a good one, and what he was really pursuing was (a)
the right question to ask the (b) right kind of machine.

He frowned at the problem as if he could squeeze an answer out of his
brow, and almost had what he wanted when he became aware that he had
impaled Tess Milburn with his unseeing gaze and was scowling fiercely at
her. She smiled, that brief, weak showing of teeth that she did instead
of blushing. It was Chris who blushed, a very little, but already he was
sliding back into his thoughts, away from embarrassment, apology, even
from the dinner table.

The solution, he thought, lies here: that it’s fair to consider all
three orbits as ellipses and the final solution as a predictable
relationship between the lengths of one focal axis of each. He saw,
clearly, a circular cam riding a parabolic track, and the linkage
between three such tracks and their cams trembled in the wings of his
intellect, ready for the spotlight, the entrance—

Wham!

The screen door slammed back against the verandah wall and a heavy
suitcase simultaneously struck the floor by the table.

“Hit the blockhouse!” roared a heavy baritone. “ ’Ware my tail-jets! I’m
a-comin’ _in!_”

“Billy! Oh, Billy!” cried Miz Binns.

She was on her feet with her arms out, but couldn’t use them before she
was caught up and swung around by the laughing giant who had hit the
floor right by the suitcase.

Tess Milburn sat astonished, stopped, like some many-functioned machine
when its master switch is thrown; chewing, breathing, blinking, probably
heartbeat, certainly cerebration, all ceasing at once in the face of
something she had no reflexes for.

Mr. Magruder made a sound that would have been a grunt if it had been
vocalized, and bent to pick up the fork he had dropped. With no change
of expression, he scrubbed it with his napkin and then went on eating.

Chris Binns sat with his eyes closed, to all appearances as frozen as
the girl, but inwardly in an agony of activity as he pursued his
vanished thoughts, humbly asking only for their shape and texture, not
their whole substance, something he could find again and rebuild on. But
it was not possible; the lights were out inside, the doors closed. He
blew gently through his nostrils, making up his mind to try again some
time, and opened his eyes. “Hi, Bill.”

The cadet put his mother down. “Contact, shipmate!” he said
thunderously. His hair was crisp, sun-colored; his shoulders bulged
under the short, full cape of the space-blue topcoat. Its four buttons,
gold, white, green, red for the inner planets, glittered in their
midnight background as he flung himself on his brother. Chris, flailing
away the accurate and painful pounding of the cadet’s greeting, suddenly
giggled foolishly, slid his chair back, bent sideways.

“Hi. Hi.”

“And if it isn’t little old Tessie Heartburn,” Billy roared, bestowing
an explosive kiss on Tess Milburn’s cheek. “And Old Faithful himself,
star boarder extraordinary, conversationalist par ex—” His heavy hand
was stopped abruptly in its descent to the old man’s shoulder apparently
by nothing more than Mr. Magruder’s quick glance upward.

The hand raised again, to be a facetious, almost insulting salute. “Mr.
Magruder.”

Mr. Magruder nodded once, curtly, and went about the business of eating.

Miz Binns fluttered and clucked and cried. “Billyboy, oh, it’s so _good_
to, why didn’t you _tell_ us you were, have you had your, now, Tess, if
you’ll just move a little this way and, Chris, just, and I’ll set you
another—”

“You wired you’d be here in the morning,” said Chris.

“Sun always comes up when little Billee walks in,” grinned the cadet.
“But ack-shull, shipmate, I got a ride in a supply truck, begged off
final inspection, and jatoed out.” He looked swiftly around the table.
“Where’s Horrible Horrocks?”

“Billy!” squeaked his mother.

“Miss Horrocks got transferred to another school,” said Chris. “Thought
we wrote you about it.”

“Oh, yes. Forgot. Read through the home gossip real fast,” said Billy
carelessly.

Miz Binns said, “Mr. Magruder found us a new boarder for her room. A
Miss Gerda Stein. We thought she’d be settled in by the time you
arrived. But you didn’t arrive tomorrow, did you?”

Billy laughed and kissed her. “I sure didn’t arrive tomorrow. I’m going
to arrive ten minutes ago.”

“Oh-h, you know what I … silly-Billy. Chris, come help me.”

Chris looked at her numbly for a moment, then got to his feet, jostling
the table. Billy laughed and said, “I know you, Mom. You don’t need
help. You’ve got secrets.” He turned grinning to Tess Milburn. “They’re
prolly going to talk about you.”

“Oh, Billy, you’re awful, just awful,” his mother said pinkly. Mr.
Magruder only steadied his water glass as Chris bumped the table, and
then began to butter a roll. Tess Milburn gave her embarrassed
lip-flicker, and Miz Binns said, “Don’t you listen to that wicked boy,
Tess,” and shook a fond finger at Billy. She made an abrupt beckoning
motion and disappeared into the kitchen.

Chris followed her out. She stood by the door, and when he was in the
room, she reached out a practiced hand and stopped the door from
swinging. With the ignorance and acoustics apparently possible only to
mothers, she began speaking intensely in a whisper which was totally
inaudible to him, pointing and flapping toward the dining room, moving
her lips too much and her jaw not at all.

“What?” he asked, not too softly. He was mildly irritated.

She cast her eyes up to heaven and shushed him violently. She took his
arm and backed across the kitchen, looking past his shoulder all the
while as if she expected everyone in the dining room to be pressing ears
to the door. “I _said_ what did you have to go and have _her_ for dinner
tonight of all nights, Billy home and all?”

“We had a date. Besides, I didn’t know Billy was—”

“It’s very inconsiderate,” she complained.

“Well, what do you want me to do?”

“It ought to be sort of a family thing, your brother home from school.”

The irritation rose to as high as it ever got with Chris—not very high.
“Then let’s get rid of Mr. Magruder, too.”

“That’s different and you know it.”

He did know it. Mr. Magruder had his own bubble of a life within the
lives they all led and he stayed unbreakably within it. He communed with
himself, his newspaper and his habits, which were so regular that, once
established, they required no imagination or conjecture from anyone else
in the place. He could talk: but he needn’t. They hardly saw him, which
led them all to believe that he didn’t see them much either.

“Well, all right,” said Chris. “I’ll just explain it to her and take her
home and come right back.”

“You can’t, you can’t,” she fretted. It was what she wanted him to do,
but that disqualified it; she wouldn’t have that on her conscience.

He shrugged and said, “Then what did you call me out here for?” The
question was not rude, but a genuine request for information.

“It’s a shame, that’s all,” she answered. She squeezed her hands
together and looked at them unhappily. There seemed to be nothing else
for him to say and certainly nothing he could do. He turned to go back
to the dining room, but she said, “Why is she here so much, Chris?”

“I don’t know, Mom. She—” He made a vague gesture. He really didn’t
know. Tess dropped around occasionally—hadn’t it been to visit Miz
Binns, anyway at first? And since she was around so much, he talked to
her.

Talked about what? Again, he couldn’t recall clearly. Anything. Whatever
was on his mind that could be talked about. His work—some of it; most of
it couldn’t be expressed in words; it was conceptual, or technical, or
mathematical, or all three. His feelings—some of them; most of them
couldn’t be expressed in words, either; they were too conceptual, or
unidentified, or occluded, or all three.

“We go to the movies sometimes,” he said at length. And, “It’s nice
sometimes to have somebody to talk to.” He said that, not “talk with.”
He would have wondered why, but his mother interrupted his thinking the
way people always did.

“I know this is no time to discuss it,” she said in that urgent whisper,
“but what’s she want? I mean are you, do you, are you planning to, you
know.” She finished it like a statement, not a question.

“I—never thought about it.”

“You better. The way she acts.”

“All right. But like you say, Mom, it’s not the time to think about it
now.” The limited irritation was back again. He turned to the door which
exploded inward and struck him a stinging blow on the right pelvis.

“Now what’s going on in th’ black hole?” Billy roared. “You engineers
precessin’ my gyros again?”

“Tell Mom what you want to eat,” said Chris painfully. He walked stiffly
back to the table and sat down. He rubbed his hip covertly. He didn’t
look at Tess Milburn. He couldn’t.

He picked at his food. She picked at her food. Mr. Magruder, who drank
tea with his meals, drank his tea. And all the while, voices came from
the kitchen. Chris was acutely embarrassed, but at the same time he was
wondering about the filtering effect of the swinging door, because it
passed Miz Binns’ high frequencies—the sibilants and the hiss of her
stage whisper—and Billy’s lows, the woofs, the chest tones—all without
transmitting a single intelligible syllable. But when Billy laughed, he
understood it. He had heard that laugh before.

Billy bumped the door and surged through without touching it again as it
swung open and back. His mother caught it and held it open on her side
and bleated, “No, Billy, no!” and Billy laughed again and said, “Don’t
you worry your pretty little head about it, Mom. Billy fix.” Miz Binns
stood in the doorway wringing her hands, then sighed and went back in to
get Billy’s dinner.

Billy plumped down at the table and passed Chris a wide wink. “Well,
Tess,” he said expansively. “So long since I’ve seen you. Grown a bit,
filled out a bit. Hell around a bit too, I bet.” He ignored the silent
drop of her jaw and the quick frightened smile that followed it. “You’ve
been walled up in this haymow too long, girl. A little hurry an’ noise
will do you a world of good. How about you and me, we couple up right
after chow and buzz this burg?”

Stricken, she looked at Chris.

Chris said, “Look, Billy, we—”

Just then, Miz Binns came in with a plate heaped and steaming. Serving
dishes on the table not good enough for little Billee, Chris thought
bitterly. Cold by now.

“Mom, what do you know! Tess and I got a date for right away!” Billy
announced.

“Oh, now, _Billy!_” said Miz Binns in that
he’s-naughty-but-he’s-so-sweet tone. “Your very first night and we
haven’t had a chance to chat even, and you have so little time, and—”

“Mom,” the cadet said cheerfully, “you and I, we have two solid weeks in
the daytime to blow tubes and scavenge tanks to our hearts’ delight, in
the daytime when all good slaves are out digging gold. I hate to deprive
you tonight, but gosh, Mom, don’t be stingy. Spread it around. It’s
okay, isn’t it Chris?”

_It’s okay, isn’t it, Chris?_ All his life, that special laugh and then
this question. For a while, when he was nine and Billy was seven, he
used to burst into tears when he heard that question. For a while before
that and afterward, he had responded with a resounding “No!” And a
little later on, he had reasoned, argued, or silently shaken his head.
Nothing ever made any difference. Billy would watch him and smile
happily through his countermeasure, no matter what, and when he was
finished would go right ahead and take, or do, or not do whatever the
thing was that he wanted and Chris didn’t. He had outweighed Chris since
he was four years old, outtalked him always.

But this one time, this one lousy time, he wasn’t going to get away with
it.

Chris looked at his mother’s anxious face, at Tess with a spot of pink
on each of her sallow cheeks, a shine in her eyes that he had never been
able to put there. _No, by God, no_.

He filled his lungs to say it out loud when the impossible happened. A
hard hand closed on his left wrist, under the table. A voice spoke in
his left ear: “Let him!”—soft but commanding. He looked down at the
hand, but it had already gone. He looked at the face to his left, and
Mr. Magruder impassively poured more tea. No one else seemed to have
seen or heard.

It was Mr. Magruder, all right, with some knack of directional,
perfectly controlled speech, two syllables formed and aimed from the
side of the thin dry lips for Chris and Chris alone. It was unusual for
the old man to say anything at all beyond “Pass the salt.” It was
unprecedented for him to enter a conversation, advise.

Chris looked at Tess’s troubled, almost beseeching face, the pink, the
shine. “You want to go?”

She looked at Billy and back to him, and then dropped her eyes. Chris
felt rather than saw the slightest movement of Mr. Magruder’s foot
against the floor. He did not touch Chris, but the movement was another
syllable of command; there was no question about that. “Go ahead if you
want to.”

Mr. Magruder nodded, or simply dropped his chin to watch his hands fold
a napkin. Miz Binns said, “I still think you’re _awful_, Billy,” and did
not quite add, “dear boy.” Tess Milburn giggled.

Billy began to eat heartily, and what might have been a very strained
silence indeed was canceled before it could become a problem.

The doorbell rang.

“I’ll get it,” Chris said relievedly. He got up and turned to the open,
screened doorway.

_It must be a trick of the light_ was the thought that flashed through
his mind, but there wasn’t time to pursue it. “Yes?”

“I’m Gerda Stein. Mr. Magruder—”

“Oh, it’s Miss Stein,” his mother called. “Come in, do come in.”

It had been no trick of the light. Chris opened the screen door and
stood back, speechless. He had known there were human beings like this.
TV and the movies were full of them. They smiled from magazines and
book-jackets, crooned and called and sold coffee, crockery and cosmetics
on the car radio. All these are the proper and established places for
such creatures; they don’t, they just _don’t_ stand breathtakingly under
the porch light on warm summer evenings and then walk into your own
familiar house.

Someone nudged him out of his daze—Miz Binns. “Dinner’s on, I can warm
up something, and your room’s all, my son from the Space Academy just,
no, this is Chris. Billy’s the—”

“How do you do, Chris,” said Gerda Stein.

“Uh,” said Chris. He followed the girl and his mother through the foyer
into the dining room.

“You already know Mr. Magruder and _this_, this is Billy.”

Billy shot up out of his chair like one of the Base rockets, and again
Mr. Magruder steadied his water glass.

“Well-l-l,” Billy breathed, a sound like the last descending tones of a
mighty alert siren.

Gerda Stein smiled at him and Chris could see him blink. “No,” she said
in answer to something Miz Binns was saying, “I’ve had dinner.”

Chris came around the table and found his eyes on Tess Milburn’s face.
It was wistful. “And this is Tess Milburn,” he blurted. In that instant
of empathy for the ignored girl, so shadowed by the great light cast by
the newcomer, he fairly shouted. He looked like a fool and knew it.

Gerda Stein smiled warmly and took Tess’s hand. Surprisingly, Tess
smiled, too, and went on smiling after she had been released—a real
smile, for once, substitute for nothing.

Chris felt embarrassed to see it—a strange embarrassment, starting with
the consciousness of how hot his ears were, then going through a
lightning intuitive chain to the insight that he was embarrassed when he
made someone happy, and that it had been worth the effort of thought
because it was so rare, and then the conclusion that anyone who made
people happy so rarely couldn’t be worth much. Which led him, of course,
to look at his younger brother.

Billy had stopped chewing when Gerda Stein came in and he had not
swallowed. He seemed for these long seconds as preoccupied as Chris was
most of the time, and the slight flick of his blue eyes from Tess’s face
to Gerda Stein’s indicated the source of his deep perplexity. And
suddenly Chris saw it, as if it had been imprinted across the golden tan
of the cadet’s bland forehead in moving lights.

If Billy now went on with his idea of a date with Tess, this vision
would be left here with Chris and Mom and Mr. Magruder and—very soon
now, Mr. Magruder and Mom would retire, and …

On the other hand, Billy shared with his mother a deep reluctance to
face anyone with “Beat it, I don’t need you around,” or any variation
thereof.

Chris sat down slowly before his cold dinner and waited. He felt some
things which taught him a great deal. One of them was that it was good
to be involved with Billy in a situation where Billy couldn’t win. If
Billy backed out of the date, Chris would go; if not, not; and by this
Chris learned that the date didn’t really matter to him. This was a
great relief to him. His mother’s questions had disturbed him more than
he had known until he felt the relief.

Billy sighed through his nostrils and finally swallowed his mouthful.
“I’m backin’ off my gantry, girl,” he said to Tess, “so start the
count-down.”

Chris caught a quick puzzled flicker of expression on Gerda Stein’s
face. Miz Binns said, “He always talks like that. He means he and Tess
are going out. Space talk.” Chris thought she was going to run and hug
him, but with obvious effort she controlled her feelings and said to
Miss Stein, “Well, come settle in the parlor until I can take you up to
your room.”

“Have fun, kids,” said Chris, and got up and followed to the parlor.

In the foyer, he turned and glanced back. He met Mr. Magruder’s
penetrating gaze, a startling experience for one used to seeing only the
man’s cheek or lowered eyelid. He wished he could get some message, some
communication from it, but this time he couldn’t. He felt very strange,
as if he had been given absolute alternatives: chaos, or obedience to an
orderly unknown. He knew he had chosen obedience and he was
inexpressibly excited.

“Always wanted a spaceman in the family,” Miz Binns was saying proudly
to Gerda Stein, “and Billy’s always wanted to be one, and now look.”

From the couch, Gerda Stein said politely, “He seems to be doing very
well.”

“Well? Why, he’s in the top twentieth of his class, nobody ever did that
before except one fellow that was an air marshal’s son, Billy’s born for
it, that’s what he is, born for it.”

Chris said, “He was running around in a space helmet when he was two
years old.”

At his voice, Gerda Stein turned and smiled, “Oh, hello.”

“I declare I don’t know how I could’ve had two boys so different,” said
Miz Binns. “Years, I just couldn’t guess what Chris here would end up
doing, he’s nicely settled down though, fixing adding machines.”

“Computers,” Chris said mildly.

“Really! That must be very interesting. I use a computer.”

“What kind?”

“KCI. It’s only a very simple little one.”

“I know it. Mechanical binary. Clever little machine,” said Chris and,
to his intense annoyance, found himself blushing again.

“Oh, well, you have something in common,” said Miz Binns. “I’ll just
scoot along upstairs and see that your room’s just right. You keep Miss
Stein happy till I call, Chris.”

“Don’t go to any—” the girl began, but Miz Binns had fluttered out.

Chris thought, _we have something in common, have we?_ He was absolutely
tongue-tied. Keep Miss Stein happy, hah! He flicked a glance at her and
found with something like horror that she was watching him. He dropped
his eyes, wet his lips, and sat tensely wishing somebody would say
something.

Billy said something. Leaving Tess standing in the foyer, he stepped
into the parlor, winked at Gerda Stein and said to Chris, “I heard that
last test-firing of yours, shipmate—’Have fun!’ Well, _you_ have fun.”
He looked at Gerda Stein with open admiration. “Just remember, brer
pawn—first move don’t win the game; it’s only an advantage. You told me
that yourself.”

“Shucks,” Chris said inanely.

“I’ll see _you_ soon,” said Billy, stabbing a forefinger toward her.

“Good night,” Gerda Stein said courteously.

Billy left the room, bellowing, “C’mon Venus-bird, let’s go git
depraved.” Tess Milburn squeaked, then tittered, and they went out. Miz
Binns came downstairs just then and stopped at the front door.

“You Tess Milburn,” she called in what she apparently hoped was mock
severity, “you don’t go keepin’ that boy up until all hours!” From the
warm dark came Billy’s rich laughter.

“That boy,” breathed Miz Binns, coming into the parlor, “I do declare,
he’s a caution, come on upstairs now if you want to and see your room,
Miss Stein. That your bags out there on the stoop? Chris, just nip out
and get Miss Stein’s bags in like a good boy.”

“All right, Mom.” He was glad to have something to do. He went out and
found the bags, two of them, a large suitcase and what looked like an
overnight case. The suitcase was no trouble, but the little one weighed
perhaps fifty pounds and he grunted noisily when he lifted it.

“Here,” called Miz Binns, “I’ll—”

“No!” he barked. “I can handle it.” Mom wouldn’t learn, couldn’t learn
that a man might be humiliated in front of strangers.

He lifted the bags abruptly, knowing just how Bill—how a fellow could
walk, sing, surge them up to the landing, lift and surge again to the
top, breathing easily. He took a step and swung, and got all tangled
with the screen door, and banged the overnight case noisily against the
jamb; his arms and back wouldn’t do the easy graceful thing his mind
knew how to do with them. So he didn’t lift and swing, or breathe
easily, but plodded and hauled, and came into the north bedroom blowing
like a grampus. All in the world he hoped for was that he wouldn’t catch
Gerda Stein smiling.

He caught Gerda Stein smiling.

He put the bags down by the bed and went blindly back down the stairs.
Mr. Magruder was just then pacing his leisurely way into the parlor, his
newspaper under his arm, and Chris became painfully aware of how hard he
was still breathing and how it must look. He controlled it and fled to
the dining room.

He stood against the table for a long moment, pulling himself together,
and then, with his glazed eyes fixed on the dish of cold hominy grits,
slid gratefully into the familiar aloneness of his conjectures.

Hominy is corn, is dry before cooking; absorbs moisture softens swells
steams gets cold loses moisture gets gummy if left long enough would set
like concrete anyway until more moisture came along. Deeper he went into
a lower level, seeing the hydroscopes, the thirsty molecular matrices,
yearning and getting, satiated, yielding, turning again to thirsty corn.
Down again to a lower level and the awareness all about him of the
silent forces of the capillary, the unreasonable logic of osmosis, the
delicate compromise called meniscus.

_Water, water, everywhere …_ in the table-legs and the cloth, water
fleeing from the edges of a pool of gravy, flying to the pores of a
soda-cracker, all the world sere and soggy, set, slushy, slippery and
solid because of water.

Down in this level there were no pipestem arms nor unready tongues nor
fumblings for complex behavior codes known reflexively to all the world
but Christopher Binns, and he was comforted.

“What you _dreaming_ about, boy, I do declare!”

He came up out of it and faced her. He felt much better. “I’ll give you
a hand washing up, Mom.”

“Now you don’t have to do any such of a thing, Chris. Go on into the
parlor and chat with Mr. Magruder.”

He chuckled at the thought and began to stack the dirty plates. His
mother went into the kitchen to clear the sink, shaking her head. Her
woeful expression, he divined, was only superficial, a habit, an
attitude; he could sense the core excitement and delight with which
Billy always filled her.

_Billy can do no wrong; he syllogized—_

_Billy does everything well;_ _THEREFORE_

_Billy does no wrong well_.

He carried the plates into the kitchen.

“I’m going to bed, dear.”

“Good night, Mom.”

“Thanks for helping. Chris—”

“You’re not angry at Billy, are you, about Tess, I mean?”

“Why should I be angry?” he asked.

“Well, I’m glad, then.” She thought he had answered her. “He doesn’t
mean it, you know that.”

“Sure, Mom.” He wondered dispassionately how her remark could possibly
be applied to the situation, and gave up. He wondered also, with
considerably more interest, how and why he had been aware that while he
was in the kitchen, Gerda Stein had come down and re-entered the parlor
and that Mr. Magruder had gone up to bed. He wondered also what use the
information would be to him, he who had the Sadim touch. The Sadim touch
was a recurrent whimsy with him; it was Midas spelled backward and
signified that everything he touched, especially gold, turned
to—“Shucks.”

“What, dear?”

“Nothing. Good night, Mom.”

Palely she kissed him and tiredly toiled up the stairs. He stood by the
dining room table; looking at the cut-glass sugar bowl, now turned out
to pasture in its old age and holding two dozen teaspoons, handles down,
looking like something a robot bride in a cartoon might carry for a
bouquet. He scanned the orderly place-settings around the table, the
clean inverted cups mouthing their saucers, each handle a precise sixty
degrees off the line of the near table edge; the bread plates with the
guaranteed fourteen-karat, one hundred percent solid gold edging absent
from every convexity, wanly present in the concave.

And he couldn’t lose himself in these things. Below the level of the
things themselves, there was nowhere he could go. Something had closed
his usual road to elsewhere and he felt a strange panic. He was unused
to being restrained in the here and now, except on company time.

All right, then, he admitted.

He walked slowly through the foyer and into the parlor. Gerda Stein sat
on the couch. She wasn’t knitting, or reading, or doing anything. Just
sitting quietly, as if she were waiting. What on Earth could she be
waiting for?

He looked for the right place to sit, a chair not too close (not because
he was afraid of being “forward” but because he would have absolutely no
resources if she thought he was) and not too far away (because it was
late and everyone was in bed and they would have to keep their voices
low. In case they talked).

“Here,” she said, and put her hand on the cushion beside her.

In his own house, he said, “Thank you, thank you very much,” and sat
down. When the silence got to be too much for him, he faced her. She
looked back gravely and he turned again and stared at the print of the
sentinel at Pompeii which had hung there since before he was born.

“What are you thinking?”

_You’re the most beautiful thing I’ve ever seen_. But he said, “You
comfortable?” He considered his statement, hanging there untouched in
the room, and added with something like hysteria, “In your room, I
mean.”

She shrugged. It conveyed a great deal. It was, “Quite what I expected,”
and “There’s certainly nothing to complain about,” and “What can it
possibly matter?” and, more than anything else, “I won’t be here long
enough to have any feelings about it one way or the other.”

Any of these things, spoken aloud by anyone else, would have made him
wildly defensive, for all he may not have been able to express it.
Spoken by her, perhaps it would be different. He couldn’t know. But
transmitted thus mutely—he had nothing to say. He put his hands together
between his knees and squeezed, miserable and excited.

“Why did your brother go to the Space Academy?” she asked.

“Congressman Shellfield got him the appointment.”

“I didn’t mean that.”

“Oh,” he said, “you mean _why_.” He looked at her and again had to look
away. “He wanted to, I guess. He always wanted to.”

“You can’t always want to do anything,” she said gently. “When did it
start?”

“Gosh … I dunno. Years back. When we were kids.”

“What about you?”

“Me?” He gave a short, uncertain laugh. “I can’t remember wanting
anything specially. Mom says—”

“I wonder where he ever got the idea,” she mused.

He guessed she had been thinking about Billy up in her room and had come
down to find out more about him, had sat here waiting until he could
come and tell her more. He made a sad, unconscious little gesture with
his hands. Then he remembered that she had asked a question. When he
didn’t answer questions, why did she just wait like that?

“We used to play spaceman before Billy could talk,” he recalled. He
glanced her way and laughed surprisedly. “I’d forgotten all about that.
I really had.”

“What kind of games?”

“Games, _you_ know. Rocket to the Moon and all. I was the captain and he
was the crew. Well, at first I was the … I forget. Or I was the
extraterrestrial and he was the explorer. Games.” He shrugged. “I
remember the takeoffs. We’d spread out on the couch and scream when the
acceleration pressed the air out of our lungs. Mom didn’t much like that
screaming.”

She laughed. “I can imagine. Tell me, do all spacemen talk the way he
does?”

“You mean that ‘shipmate’ and ‘gantry’ and ‘hit the blockhouse’?”

He paused for such a long time that she asked quietly, “Don’t you want
to tell me?”

He started. “Oh, sure, sure. I had to think. Last year, Easter vacation,
he brought another cadet with him, name of Davies. Nice fellow, quiet,
real black hair, sort of stoop-shouldered. I’d heard Billy talking that
way before, thought it was the way to talk. But when I used it on
Davies, he’d just look at me—” unconsciously, Chris was mimicking the
wonderstruck Davies—“as if I was crazy. Harmless, but crazy.” He gave
this soft, embarrassed chuckle. “I guess I didn’t do it right. I guess
there’s just exactly a right way of saying those things. You have to be
a cadet to do it.”

“Oh? Do all the cadets talk that way?”

“Davies didn’t. Not to us, anyway. I never met any others.”

“Maybe Billy’s the only one who talks that way.”

Chris had never considered the possibility. “That would sure sound funny
at the Academy.”

“Not if he never did it there.”

Chris made a sudden awkward movement of the head, trying to brush away
the idea. Stubbornly, it wouldn’t brush. It was, after all, the first
hypothesis his kind of logic had been able to accept for Cadet Davies’
odd reactions. In itself, this was welcome, but it opened up an area of
thinking about his brother he disliked to indulge in.

He said as much: “I wouldn’t like to think of Billy that way, talking
like—like when we were seven, eight years old.”

“Why not? How do you like to think of Billy?”

“He’s—getting what he wants. Going where he wants to go. He always has.”

“Instead of you?”

“I don’t know what you mean.” Or, he added silently, _why you ask or why
you want to know any of this_. He shifted his feet and turned to meet
that disconcerting, warm, open, unjeering smile. “What do you want me to
say?” he demanded, with a trace of irritation.

She settled back slightly. He knew why; she was going to wait again. He
wouldn’t be able to cope with that, he knew, so he said quickly, “It’s
all right for Billy to be that way. He can do things I—other people
can’t do. I’m not mad about that, not mad at him. There’s nothing to be
mad at. It would be like—being mad at a bird because it has wings. He’s
just different.”

He realized that he had wandered from the area of her question, so he
stopped, thought back, located it. Billy gets what he wants—_instead of
you_.

He began again: “It’s all right for Billy to get what he wants, even if
it’s something I happen to want, too, and don’t get … How can I explain
it?”

Rising suddenly, he began pacing, always turning away from her,passing
her with his eyes downcast. It was as if the sight of her chained him,
and with his eyes averted, he could run with his own thoughts again.

“It’s as if Billy wasn’t something separate at all, but just another
side of me. Part of me wants to go to the Academy—Billy goes. Part of me
wants to go out with Tess, not just to the movies, but _out_ with her,
make her feel—you know. Well, Billy does it. Or talk like Billy, look
like him, all that racket and fast gab.” He laughed, almost fondly. He
sounded, then, just like his mother. “Sometimes he’s a nuisance, but
mostly I don’t care. There’s other things, lots of them, that I do that
Billy couldn’t. There’s another part of me that does those things.”

He allowed himself another quick look at Gerda Stein. She had turned to
follow his pacings. He was in the far corner of the room and she sat
with her cheek on her bare forearm, her head inclined as on a pillow and
her hair hung down over the arm of the couch, heavy and bright.

“What things?” she asked.

He came back and sat down beside her. “It’s hard to say. It’s very hard
to say.”

He sat for a long time performing the totally unprecedented task of
verbalizing what he had never given words to before, the thoughts and
feelings, ideas and intuitions so intimately, so mutely his own; all the
things he set aside when he talked to Tess, all the things which
occupied and preoccupied him during that ninety percent of his life when
he must commune and could not communicate. He sat there striving with it
while she waited. Her waiting was no longer a trial to him. He realized
that, but would not think about it. Yet.

“The nearest I can get to it,” he said when he was ready, “is this: I’ve
found out something that’s at the root of everything anyone can think
about, something that all thinking gets to sooner or later, and starts
from, too. One simple sentence … Now wait.” He put his simple sentence
in front of his mind and looked at it for a long studious time. Then he
spoke it. “Nothing is always absolutely so.”

He turned to face her. She nodded encouragingly but did not speak.

“It’s a—help. A big help,” he said. “I don’t know when I first found it
out. A long time back, I suppose. It helps with people. I mean the whole
world is built on ideas that are caused by finding out that one thing or
another around them just _isn’t_ so. Or it isn’t so any longer. Or it’s
almost so, but not absolutely.”

On receipt of another encouraging nod from Gerda Stein, “Nothing is
always absolutely so,” he said again. “Once you know that, know it for
sure, you can do things, go places you never thought about before.
Everything there is gives you some place to go, something to think
about. Everything. Take a—a brass rivet, say. It’s brass; you start with
that. And what is brass? An alloy. How much change of what metal would
make it not be brass? Given enough time, would radioactive decay in one
of the metals transmute it enough so it wouldn’t be brass any more?

“Or take the size. How big is it? Well, doesn’t that depend? It’s
smaller after it’s been used than when it was new. What color is it?
That depends, too. In other words, if you’re going to describe to me
exactly what that rivet is, you’re going to have to qualify and modify
and get up a list of specs half as long as a tide chart and half as wide
as Bowditch. And then all I have to do is sweat one drop of sweat on
that rivet and wait twenty-four hours and you’ll have to revise your
specs.

“Or drop down a level. Pass a current through my rivet. The copper has
this resistance and the zinc has another and a trace of iron has still
more. What’s the velocity of electromagnetic force through all this
mess, and what kind of arguments do the atoms have about it? Or use a
strong magnetic field. Why—really why, aside from ‘It just happens’—is
the copper so shy magnetically in brass and so out-and-out ferrous in
alnico?”

He stopped to breathe. He breathed hard. It recalled to him how she had
smiled when he had puffed into her room with the bags.

He realized suddenly that he had been altogether wrong in his estimate
of that smile. He had feared it because he was ready to fear any smile.
Now he knew that it was not just any smile, but the one he saw now—warm,
encouraging, much like the smile which Tess Milburn had found and kept.

“What I’m driving at is, with this idea, that nothing is always
absolutely so. You don’t really need people or anything about
them—movies, TV, talk; anyway, not for hours at a time, days. You don’t
have to hate people; I don’t mean that at all. It’s just that people’s
worries don’t matter so much. People’s troubles you can answer every
time by saying, ‘Nothing is always absolutely so,’ and go on to
something else.

“But when you see that the wet half of the towel is darker than the dry
half, or hear the sound of a falling bomb descending when all reason
says it ought to rise in pitch, and you know where you’re going to
start: _Why?_ and where you’ll wind up: _Nothing is always absolutely
so_, and challenge yourself to find the logic between start and
finish—why, then you have your hands full; then you have a place to go.”

“Isn’t that a sort of escape?” the girl asked quietly.

“Depends on where you’re standing at the time. Mixing yourself up with
human problems is maybe escaping from these other things. Anyway, these
other things _are_ human problems.”

“Are they?”

“E=MC² turned out to be. First it had to be thought out, with the
thinking all the reward in sight, and after that it had to be applied,
but don’t tell me it isn’t a human problem! Someone, for instance, had
to put pineapple rings on a ham before baking, for the very first time!
Or eat a raw oyster. That seems to me to be the kind of thinking I’m
talking about.” He brought his hand down for emphasis on the arm of the
couch; it fell right on hers. “That’s why Billy’s at the Academy,
because someone, and then some people, and then mankind began to want
space.”

She curled her fingers around his hand, not quite clasping it, and
looked down contemplatively. “A good hand,” she said in an impersonal
voice, and gave it back to him.

“Huh? It’s crummy—solder burns, ground-in bench dirt …” He held it as if
it no longer completely belonged to him. _And it doesn’t_, he thought
with a start.

“Tell me,” she asked lazily, “is the Academy’s way the right way to get
to space?”

“The only way,” he said positively, and then, because his reason caught
up with his honesty, he amended, “that’s being tried.”

Suddenly she sat up straight, leaned forward. She tossed her hair back
as she turned toward him, with a gesture he knew he’d never forget.

She said, “I wonder about that. I wonder about fine-tuning men
physically until they’re all muscle and bounce, just to coop them up in
a cabin for months on end. I wonder about all the training in
astrogation when even primitive computers can do better, and no training
at all in conversation, which we don’t have a machine for yet. I wonder
at the thinking behind hundred percent male complements on those ships.
I wonder about 10G stress tests on men who will have to develop an
inertialess drive before they can think about _real_ space travel. But
most of all, I wonder—I worry—about putting extroverts on spacecraft.”

She settled back again, looking at him quizzically.

“All right,” he said, “I can play that game. Suppose I took every one of
those wonderments of yours and turned them over to look at the other
side. What would you do instead—man your ships with soft-bellied
bookworms with no reflexes? Train them in philosophy and repartee in an
eighteenth-century salon? Teach them to rely on their computers and
never know what the machines are doing? Put women on the ships for them
to get jealous about and fight over? Lay in a pack of brooding
introverts, neuroses and all?”

“Neuroses,” she repeated. “I’m glad you mentioned them. I imagine you’re
pretty sure that humanity is by and large a pretty neurotic species.”

“Well, if your definition—”

“Never mind the specs,” she said, interrupting him.

There was a new, concise ring to her voice that affected him much as had
the first sight of her, standing out there under the porch light.
Breathless, he fell silent.

“Yes, humans are neurotic,” she answered her own question. “Insecure,
disoriented, dissatisfied, fearful, full of aggressions against their
own kind, always expecting attack, always afraid of being misunderstood,
always in conflict between the urge to fly like a bird and the urge to
burrow like a mole. Now why should all this be?”

He simply shook his head, bewildered.

“You have a very special mind, Chris, with your hypotheses and your
lower levels and your quarreling atoms. Can you take a really _big_
hypothesis?”

“I can try.”

“Hypothesis,” she said, making it sound like a story title. “There is a
space-traveling species that achieved space flight in the first place
because, of all species, it was the most fit. It established a commerce
throughout a system, systems of systems, a galaxy, another. It had an
inertialess faster-than-light drive, a suspended animation technique,
sub-etheric communications—why go on listing all its achievements? Just
say it was technologically gifted and its gift was only one facet of the
whole huge fact that it was born and bred for space travel.

“Now, expanding as it must, it spread itself thin. It compensated as
well as it could by learning to breed fast, by reducing to the minimum
the size of its crews and increasing the efficiency of its ships. But
each of these expedients only increased the spread; there’s an awful lot
of business in this universe for the sole qualified species.

“The only way out was to locate planets similar to their own home world
and seed them with people. That way, crews could be formed from one end
of the explored universe to the other. The best way to do this would be
to put down large colonial ships on suitable planets, complete with
everything they might need to raise six or seven generations while
acclimating to the planet. Thereafter, the colonies could be
self-sustaining. That’s the overall pic—uh—hypothesis. Are you still
with me?”

“N-no,” said Chris dazedly, “but go on.”

She laughed. “Now suppose one of these big colonial vessels had some
trouble—an impossible series of unlikely happenings that threw it out of
control, while in faster-than-light flight with the personnel in
suspended animation and all automatic orientation gear washed out.
Centuries go by. If it encounters a galaxy, it will search out the right
kind of planet, but it doesn’t encounter anything until—”

Her voice died down. Chris looked at her, bent closer. Her eyes were
closed and she was breathing very slowly, very deeply. As if she sensed
him near her, she opened her eyes suddenly and gave a queer twisted
smile.

“Sorry,” she murmured, and took his hand so he would not move away.
“This is the part I—don’t like to think about, even—hypothetically.”

For a moment, all the senses in Chris’s body seemed to concentrate and
flow together, to lie ecstatic in the hollow of her hand. Then she began
to speak again.

“The ship was old, old by then, and the machinery badly butchered. It
found a galaxy all right, and, in time, a planet. It snapped into normal
space; it started the gestators …”

“Gestators?” he echoed blankly.

“Artificial placentae. Easier to carry fertilized ova and nutrients than
children or even parents. But the revitalizers, for the suspendees—they
failed, about ninety-eight per cent of them.”

She sighed. It was a mourning sound. “No one knows what happened, not
all of it. No one … should. The ship wasn’t designed to make planetfall;
it was an orbital, true-space vessel. They landed it, somehow, the few
that were left. The crash took more lives—most, perhaps. The scout
ships, the ferries, neatly stacked in the gimbal locks—all wrecked.
Stores, _books_—call them books, it’s simpler—everything lost. And all
that was left, all that lived … a couple of hundred babies, helpless,
hungry, many hurt, and a handful of maimed adolescents to care for them.

“The ship didn’t last long; it wasn’t built to take what a corrosive
oxygen atmosphere could do to it. The boats hadn’t been coated and they
went, too, in weeks.

“But this is a hardy breed. Most died, but not all. Perhaps, to some,
this would be a fascinating study in the old heredity-environment
haggle; personally, I wouldn’t have the stomach for it. They lost their
language, their culture, their traditions and age-old skills. But they
kept their genes. And in time, two prime characteristics showed through
their savagery, come straight from their heritage: They bred
fantastically and they reached for the stars.

“Unlike any other civilized species, they would breed beyond the ability
of the land to support them, breed until they had to kill one another to
survive at all—a faculty developed through eons of limitless
_lebensraum_, but a deadly quality for a planet-bound race. It decimated
them and they outbred even their own deadliness, so that in a brief
time—twenty, twenty-two thousand years—they went from the dozens to the
billions, threatening to carpet the planet with their bodies. Meanwhile
the suicidal other-worldly urge to breed colored their mores and their
literature until it stood unique among the galactic cultures.

“But they reached for the stars. They excused their hunger for the stars
in a thousand ways, and when they grew too rational for excuses, they
made no more and still went starward.

“And now, today, they are on the verge of it, by themselves, struggling
along in their own terrified, terrifying way, ignorant of their origins,
mystified by the drive in their blood … yes, Chris, a neurotic people.”

After a time, Chris said, “How did you—uh—where did you hear—uh—read
this …”

She laughed and looked down again at his hand. She patted it with her
free one and then held it for a moment in both. “Hypothesis, remember?”

He shuddered, the late, large impact of her vivid voice and the pictures
it evoked. It was somehow a delightful sensation.

“Will … did they ever find their own people?”

“They were found. Contact was made—oh, four hundred years ago.”

Chris exhaled explosively. “Then it isn’t—” He looked closely at her
face. Even now, he was afraid of what her laughter might be like.
“… Earth?” he finished in a small voice.

“Isn’t it?”

“Four hundred years … everybody would know.”

She shook her head soberly. “Consider: twenty thousand years of genetic
drift, mutation, conditioning. The old drives may be
there—statistically, and in the majority. But figure it out for
yourself—what are the chances of a prototypical spaceman after all that
time? You’d find most of the desirable characteristics in some, some in
most. You’d find all of them as a statistic, in a numerical sample. But
if you were a captain looking for a crew, how would you find the man you
wanted?”

“You already described the spacebound neurotic.”

“It can’t be just any neurotic, only because he’s neurotic! He has to be
a very special—very _specialized_ neurotic indeed. They’re rare.”

“Then you’d have to announce yourself, advertise for what you wanted,
have screenings, a training program—”

“Don’t you know what would happen if all the world found out about the
spacemen?”

“There’d be a riot, I guess—everyone wanting to go.”

“There’d be a riot, all right,” she said sadly, “but not that kind.
There’s one thing mankind is afraid of, sight unseen. It’s a fear born
of his slow growth on a strange and hostile planet, with only his brains
as weapons and shelter.”

“One fear—”

“The alien. Xenophobia—virtually a racial disease. All through your
history, you have it, and it’s always there under the surface, waiting
to break out again like an ugly fire. There would be an attack on the
spacemen themselves, and then a witch-hunt the like of which even this
planet has never seen before. First the ones who fully qualify as
spacemen, though they were born here; next anyone who has some of
spaceman’s characteristics—and everyone has!”

“I don’t believe it!” Chris protested hotly. “I don’t think human beings
would go that far, be that stupid!”

“Humanity lets itself live on bare sufferance as it is,” Gerda Stein
said sorrowfully. “No, publicity isn’t the answer.”

“Then what’s been going on these four hundred years?”

She said, “Surveys. Spaceman still desperately needs recruits,
especially in this galaxy, which is new, unexplored, practically. So
spacemen come here, live among you, and every once in a while a
candidate is spotted. He’s observed for—well, long enough to determine
if he’s the right kind.”

“What’s the right kind?”

“You gave a pretty good description yourself a while ago.”

“The introspective neurotic?”

“With special mechanical and computing skills, and an inner resource
that needs no books or teleplays or joy-riding or depravity to keep him
from being bored.”

“And what happens when someone like that turns up?”

“The—agent reports, and after a while the space captain shows up. If the
candidate is willing, he goes. He disappears from Earth and just goes.”

“He has to be willing.”

“Of course! What good would he be if he was shanghaied?”

“Well,” said Chris primly, “that’s something, anyway.”

She did laugh at him, after all. It didn’t hurt. While she was laughing,
he was so disarmed that he asked her a question. He hadn’t meant to; it
just slipped out.

“Why did you want to know all those things about Billy?”

“Don’t you have any idea?”

He looked at his hands. He said, a little sullenly, “You seem to think
Billy never started anything by himself. You don’t seem to think he can.
You—well, I got the idea you think he gets pushed into things.” He
turned to her briefly. “By _me_, for Pete’s sake!”

“And you don’t think so?”

He gave a snort, embarrassed and negative. “If I could believe that, I—I
could believe everything else you’ve been saying.”

She smiled a very special smile. “Why don’t you try it, then, and find
out who’s right?”

Quietly, for a long time, he thought.

“I will,” he whispered at last. “I will.” He straightened and looked at
her. “Gerda, where do you come from?”

She rose and, spectacularly, stretched. “A little place called Port
Elizabeth,” she said. “Not very far from here. Port Elizabeth, New
Jersey.”

“Oh.”

She laughed at him again and took his hand. “Good night, Chris. Can we
talk some more about this?”

He shook his head. “Not until I really—_really_ think about it.”

“You will.”

He watched her cross the foyer to the stairs. She put one hand on the
newel post and waved to him, crinkling her eyelids in a way he would
find as unforgettable as that turn and sweep and uncovering when she
threw back her hair to face him. He found himself quite incapable of a
wave or anything else.

For a long time after he heard her door close, he stood in the parlor
looking at the stairs. At last he shook himself, turned out the lights
in the parlor and all but the night lamp in the foyer. He turned on the
porch light for Billy and went upstairs to the room they shared.

He undressed slowly and absent-mindedly, looking around his room as if
he had never seen it.

The orrery which he had started to build when he was ten, and which
Billy had taken away from him and finished, all except the painting,
which he did after all because Billy grew tired of it.

The charts of the Solar System from the celestial north (over Billy’s
bed) and from the south (over his). The Smithsonian photomap of the
Moon, carefully pasted to the ceiling, which Billy had moved to another
spot, apparently because he hadn’t been consulted, so Chris had had to
plaster up the first spot. The spaceships and Billy’s toy space helmet.
(Hadn’t it been Chris’s for his twelfth birthday? But somehow “your”
helmet had become “our” helmet and then “mine.”) Anyway, it was all
space stuff, everything in sight, and space meant Billy, so somehow it
was all Billy. And Billy not back long enough even to open his bag.

Chris got the pattern suddenly, but very late. Years late. He lay back
on his bed and grinned, then got up and switched on the light over the
desk. He went into the lavatory and got a big cake of white soap and
spread newspaper on the desk and went to work on the soap with a
pocketknife, carving a cat’s head.

Billy came in about two, clumping heavily, yawning noisily on the
stairs. He banged into the room and kicked the door closed.

“Now you didn’t have to wait up, shipmate,” he said facetiously.

“I wasn’t.” Chris got up from the desk, put the knife down, and crossed
to his bed.

Billy flung off his cape and tossed it on the easy chair. “Well, I
tilted that chick clean off the orbit, shipmate. You can take down your
meteor screens. She won’t be dustin’ around you _no_ more.”

“Why do me a favor like that?” Chris asked tiredly.

“You and Mom, you mean,” said Billy, shucking out of his space boots.
“You hadn’t oughta worry Mom like that.”

“Like what?”

“She computed you an’ li’l Heartburn on a collision orbit. Well, Billy
fix. She’ll have nothin’ in her viewplates from now on but Space Academy
blue.” He went to his cape and arranged it carefully on the chair-back.
“It’s not me, y’unnerstan’, shipmate, not me pers’nal. It’s just no one
man can compete against the Space Corps. Not on a Venus sighting
anyway,” he said with labored modesty. Chris could see his mind
wandering away from the subject before he had gotten the whole sentence
out. “How’d you make out?”

“Make out? Oh—Miss Stein.”

“Oh—Miss Stein. Fair warning, shipmate—that there’s Target the Next.”

Chris lay back and closed his eyes.

“You ever satisfied?”

“Look, shipmate,” Billy said over his shoulder, “ ‘satisfied’ didn’t
come inboard yet. These things I play straight and square, gyros on the
ship’s long axis and a-pointin’ down the main tube. So get the brief,
mudbound: tonight’s mission was for you and for Mom. Tomorrow’s for me.
Over.” He banged open his kit and pulled out a pajama zip-on. It was
then that the carved bar of soap caught his eye. “What you riggin’,
shipmate?”

“Nothing,” said Chris, as tiredly as before, but watching like a lynx.

“Sculptin’ soap. I heard of it. Often wondered.” He bent over the work
and, suddenly, laughed. That laugh. “Hey, high time we got a new hobby.
This ain’t bad for a beginner.” He rocked the desk lamp back and forth
to get shadows. “Think I’ll square it away a bit for you. It’s okay,
isn’t it, Chris?”

“I was going to fin—”

“That’s all right, don’t let it worry you. You won’t know I touched it.”
He had stopped listening to Chris while Chris spoke, stopped listening
to himself before he himself finished. He leaned over and flicked the
carving with the point of the knife, then again. He bent closer,
considering. Abruptly he sat down, got his elbows solidly planted on the
desk, pulled the light closer and went to work.

Behind him, Chris nodded once, then smiled himself into his thoughts,
level on lower level—the very first being the knowledge of who did start
(and usually complete) things—until he slept.

It was Mr. Magruder’s habit to take no breakfast at home, but to mount
his stately and ludicrous old three-tone Buick and drive into town,
where he would have tea sent up to the office. He did these things at
such an unbearably early hour that his tacit offer of transportation to
any who wanted it was almost always refused.

But this was an exception. Miz Binns greeted the change with polite
protests but inner satisfaction; Billy was sleeping late, having been
doing something up in the room until all hours, and now she would be
able to take her time and compose a really fabulous tray for him. And
Chris, looking uncharacteristically bright and cheerful for that hour,
held Gerda Stein’s elbow for her as she negotiated the front steps, and
opened the ancient Buick’s chrome-slashed door for her.

As soon as they were away from the curb, Chris took a deep breath and
said, “I’m sure you won’t be needing Miss Stein today at all, Mr.
Magruder.”

The old man said nothing and did nothing but continue to drive at his
less-than-lawful and undeviating rate.

Gerda Stein turned expressionless and watchful eyes to Chris’s face.
Nobody said anything for a two-block interval.

“Also,” said Chris firmly, “I’d appreciate it if you’d have someone in
your office call my plant around 9:15 and tell them I won’t be in today.
I could do it myself, but I want it off my mind right now.”

Mr. Magruder took his foot off the accelerator and let the car glide to
a stop at the curb before applying the brakes. It took a long silent
time. Chris opened the door and handed Gerda Stein out. He shut the
door. “Thank you, Mr. Magruder.”

As soon as the car was out of sight, Chris Binns began to laugh like a
fool. Gerda Stein held on to him, or sturdily held him up, and after a
time laughed, too.

“What was that for?” she asked when she could.

Chris wiped his eyes. “Damn if I know. Too much of … too much all at
once, I guess.” Impulsively he reached out and ran his hand gently from
her temple to the hinge of her jaw, not quite cupping her chin.

She held quite still while he did this, and when he dropped his hand,
she said, “Well, hello.”

He wished he had something like it to say, but after two trials all he
could utter was, “B-breakfast,” so they laughed together again and
strode off, Chris holding her hand tight to the inside of his elbow. She
walked well with him, long steady paces. “Can you dance in a spaceship?”
he asked.

“With slow rolls,” she twinkled.

They had waffles with cherry syrup and the best coffee in the world. He
watched his thoughts and smiled, and she watched his face. When they had
finished and fresh coffee arrived, he said, “Now, questions.”

“Go ahead.”

“You say the colony ship was wrecked here about twenty-five thousand
years ago. How do you account for Swanscombe and Pekin and
Australopithecus and all?”

“They’re indigenous.”

She touched his hand for emphasis. “Chris, if you’ll think on galactic
terms, or larger, you’ll be quite satisfied. When one of those seeking
mechanisms is set for a planet of this type, it isn’t satisfied with an
_almost_. And in multi-galactic terms, there’s plenty of choice. Homo
sap, or something very like him, grows on many of those planets, if not
most. In Earth’s case, they have even interbred. We’re not sure, but
there have been cases. Whether or not, though, Spaceman’s presence here
was no boon to the other races. He’s a pretty nice fellow in his own
element, but he makes for a fairly critical mass when you let him pile
up.”

“All right. Now a little more about this neurosis business. Why should
Spaceman be so out of kilter on a planet? I’d think of him as pretty
adaptable.”

“He certainly is! He survived for twenty-five thousand years here,didn’t
he? But about these neuroses—they’re easy enough to account for, once
you understand the basic drives. Look:

“One characteristic that has been the subject of more worry, more
sneers, more bad jokes than anything else here—except sex itself—is the
back-to-the-womb movement. Introspection and introversion and
agoraphobia and heaven knows what else, from the ridiculous—like the man
who can’t work in an office where he can’t have his back to the wall—to
the sublime—like the Nirvana concept—is traced to a desire for the
womb—_the enclosed, sustaining, virtually gravityless womb_. As soon as
you discover that the womb itself is only a symbol for this other
heritage, what explanation do you need instead?”

“Bedamned,” whispered Chris.

“Another almost universal inner tension has to do with people, though
some of us compensate admirably. What’s the most ideal state for most
people? The family—the enclosed, familiar, mutually responsive family
unit. Only strangers cause communication to break down; only outsiders
are unpredictable. Hence our cultural insanities—as I told you before,
xenophobia, the fear of the foreigner. Spaceman travels in sexually
balanced small-family units, the young getting their own ships and their
own mates as the ships meet and cross the Universe over.”

“Bedamned again,” said Chris.

“Now your ideal spaceman: He’d have to be a neurotic on Earth, just
as—if you can imagine it—a person brought up from birth to walk nothing
but tight wires would be neurotic on solid ground. He’d wear himself out
with unnecessary compensatory reflexes. Your true spaceman wants
knowledge, not pastimes. His reaction to outside pressures is to retreat
into his own resources—first, his ship (like you in your job); next, his
own thoughts and where they might lead him (like you on your own time).
And he wants a—”

Chris looked up into her eyes.

He said gently, “Go on.”

“He wants, not women, but a mate,” she said.

“Yes.”

It took a while, but she then could smile and say, “Any more questions?”

“Yes … What’s going to become of Billy?”

“Oh, he’ll be all right,” she said confidently. “He and all his kind.
He’ll graduate, and train some more, and graduate again. He’ll stay
where he is, perhaps, and train others. Or he’ll get a big job—skipper
of a Moon ferry, maybe, or second officer on the first Mars ship. Space
will make him sick—tense, always apprehensive, never comfortable—but
he’ll be strong and stick it out. After a while, he’ll retire with
honors and a pension.”

“And he’ll never know?”

“That would be too cruel … Any more?”

“Only one big one and I haven’t been able to think around it. One of the
most penetrating fears of humankind—some say the only one we’re actually
born with and don’t have to learn—is the fear of falling. How do you
equate that with Spaceman?”

She laughed. “You can’t see that?”

He shook his head.

She leaned forward, capturing him with her eyes and her urgency. “You
are home, where you belong, in space, with all of safe immensity around
you, and it’s the way you live, and work, and sleep … and suddenly,
_right there_, there’s a _planet_ under you!”

It hit him so suddenly, he gasped and actually strained upward to get
away from the floor, the great pressing obtrusive bulk of Earth. “You’re
not falling,” she whispered into the heart of his terror. _“It’s trying
to fall on you!”_

He closed his eyes and clutched at the table and forced himself to
reorient. Slowly, then, he looked at her and managed to grin. “You’ve
got yourself a boy,” he said, “Let’s get out of here, Captain.”

_My dear Chris and Gerda: I do declare I have never had my life turned
so upsy turvy all at once in my life. What with you getting married so
quick like that and then Mr. Magruder finding you that wonderful job but
I still dont know what’s so wonderful about New Zealand of all places.
Still if your happy_.

_Then on top of that Billy running out to marry Tess Milburn like that
just because you two did it I don’t understand, I always thought Billy
had his own ideas and couldn’t be led, its as if somebody just pushed a
button and bang he did it, come to think of it that’s the way he decided
to go after the Academy thing and he says it was you started him on this
soap carving even. What with keeping the marriage secret until he
graduates and trying to find a new bar of soap in the house I do declare
I don’t know where I am_.

_Speaking of Mr. Magruder which I was, he’s no longer with me, just paid
up his month and left without a howdy do. I hear he’s with Mrs. Burnett
over to Cecil Street, all she has is that little house and that hopeless
son who designs cameras and whatnot and hides in his room all the time,
which is pretty insulting after all I did for him eight solid years_.

_Well my dears take care of yourselves and send pictures of you and your
pet sheep or goats or whatever it is you crazy kids are into_.

_Much love,_

_Mom_.

Subscript by Etheric Radio

Operator Grout X 3115

CAPTAIN GERDA STEIN

2ND CHRISTOPHER STEIN

YOUR THIRD PREPARED LETTER DISPATCHED TO MIZ BINNS AS PER INSTRUCTIONS
ALSO SHEEP FARM PHOTOS SUPPLIED. MAGRUDER SENDS REGARDS AND SAYS HE HAS
A LIVE ONE IN THE BURNETT KID. PASS THE WORD. SEE YOU IN TEN YEARS OR
SO.

GROUT

AUCKLAND NEW ZEALAND

TERRA (SOL 3)

TERC 348

QUAD 196887

OCT 384

(Untranslatable)

13996462597



DEAD DAMES DON’T DIAL


IT WOUND UP WITH A MURDER, with someone being careless with a knife, and
with a wonderful brawl. But it began very quietly, like:

“Get over to Maggie Athenson’s,” said Brophy.

Howell’s eyes opened slowly. “Why?” he yawned. “Do you mean to say she’s
demanding police protection again?”

“She is,” grunted the detective lieutenant. “Get your shoes on. Or do
you plan to sneak up on somebody?”

“I thought the chief said the Athenson babe had sent out her last false
alarm?”

“Maybe she has. She’s pulled three blanks so far, and cost the city a
pile of dough. This time she gets nothing whether she likes it or not.”

“I thought you just told me to go over there,” said Howell. He was
small, thin, slow. That is, he seemed slow. There were times—but this
wasn’t one of them.

“I did, and that’s what I mean by nothing.”

Howell reached for his other shoe. “Thanks.”

“We told her no more municipal bodyguards,” Brophy expanded. “We’ll send
a man anyway. But she won’t know it. We’ll send a man just in case she
really has something to be scared of. Just because we got a homicide
law.”

“Yeah, but why me?”

“It seems that Sister Maggie has been having business dealings with a
character named Cassidy.”

“_Careful_ Cassidy?” Howell’s pale blue eyes popped.

Brophy nodded.

“Well,” said Howell. “My boy Cassidy. You’re a pal, Brophy. A nice false
alarm to trip me into a false arrest. Cassidy trapped an assistant D.A.
into false arrest one time—remember? And he’s back chasing ambulances.
What do you want me to do—drag Cassidy in here yelling his head off and
then find myself changing tires on cruise cars? Who hates me up front,
anyway?”

Brophy laughed. “Get on it, Howell. You know Cassidy and you know how he
operates. You’ve never pinned anything on him. But twice already you’ve
stopped him before he could start. Maybe this time you can put him away.
It’s worth the effort.”

“Careful Cassidy,” growled Howell. “The guy with fifty-two aces up his
sleeve and a clean, clean nose. All right, Brophy. What’s the pitch?”

Brophy glanced at the desk. “You know where Maggie lives. That big
apartment hotel, the—uh—Cheshire. There’s a drugstore across the street,
and you can see the entrance easily from there. The harness bull’s
watching the side and the back of the Cheshire. All you have to do is
see if anyone suspicious goes in or comes out.”

“An assignment,” scowled Howell. “Why couldn’t it be a bar? Lend me a
cigarette.”

With a slightly larger-than-life-size expression of patience, Brophy
passed him a cigarette. “Why do I put up with you, Howell?”

Howell lounged out the door. “Because,” he said over his shoulder, “I’m
the best man you’ve got.”

“That,” said Brophy to the opposite wall, after the small man was gone,
“is the truth.”

It was a fairly large drugstore, with entrances on two streets. The open
bronze gateways of the apartment hotel across the street were flooded
with light and easy to watch from a small display window and from any of
the long line of telephone booths.

Howell stopped outside, and the street light threw his shadow—shaped
like a question mark—on the corner of the building. An unkind lieutenant
once said that Howell’s stance was a picture of his state of mind.

There was no one on the street, and no one in the entrance of the
apartment hotel. Howell yawned and strolled into the store, and down
toward the booths. A clerk kept pace with him on the other side of the
counter.

Howell wondered how a man could actually bustle at 1.3 miles per hour.
When they reached the tobacco section the clerk asked if he could help
him, sir?

“Yes,” said Howell. “Lend me a match.”

The match was delivered, while the clerk suspended himself in a sort of
racing crouch, awaiting further orders. “Anything else, sir?”

Howell eyed him dourly. “Have you got anything that’ll make a fellow
relax?”

“Oh, yes, sir!” said the clerk eagerly, springing toward the
pharmaceutical department.

“Take some,” said Howell.

He ambled back to the phones. One booth was occupied. Howell stopped
short—a small change of pace indeed for him—when he saw who was in it.
The man came out as Howell watched. He was a big man, wide-faced,
smooth; pressed and pleated and expansive. He wore tan, all tan—light
tan, dark tan.

“Very harmonious,” said Howell. “Whatcha doing, Mr. Cassidy—making a
date?”

“Howell,” said the other, without enthusiasm, “what brings you out with
your shoes on? Been to a formal?”

“To tell you the truth,” said Howell, “I was trying to make up my mind
over a smorgasbord tray and blew a fuse, so I came here to get something
for my head. I was wondering, to repeat myself, whether you were making
a date just now.”

“Since you ask me,” said Cassidy, “I was trying to. The line’s busy.”

“Since I asked you, you won’t try to make the date. Right?”

“Right,” said Careful Cassidy.

“Good,” said Howell, and yawned again. “Then I can go home.”

“Beneath your tattered, patched pair of heads,” said Cassidy, “beats a
noble brain. How much do you know about how much, Howell? I mean by
that, just where the hell is any of my business your business?”

“What do I know? Let’s see,” said Howell. “You are very careful about
the way you order your food, dress yourself, talk, and work your lousy
swindles. You are carrying a gun under your left armpit, which means
that you are also carrying a permit for it, which means that I would
make a serious mistake if I searched you. You are in this neighborhood
because Maggie Athenson, who is loaded with loot, lives in that minaret
over the way.”

“Good old Maggie,” said Cassidy.

“You were about to commit—ah—no mistakes,” continued Howell.
“Particularly the mistake of hiring anyone to do important business for
you. Since Maggie Athenson changed her insurance of a hundred-odd G’s in
favor of her estate instead of a beneficiary, and since a business deal
with you is backed up by a codicil in her will—”

Now, Howell had not known this at all, but he knew it now—not from any
expression on Careful Cassidy’s broad bland face, but by its utter
absence. It was a long audacious shot in the dark, but he knew his man,
and he knew that Maggie Athenson was a natural for just that kind of a
fall.

Still looking at the middle distance over Cassidy’s wide tailored
shoulder, he continued, “And since said deal has mysteriously fallen
apart we would be very interested if Maggie Athenson suddenly dropped
dead of, say, Twonk’s disease.”

“What’s Twonk’s disease?”

“A failing of the armpits,” said Howell. “I only know two more things.
If you had been able to keep that date tonight—which you obviously
won’t—you would have a reservation on something which travels high and
fast, probably south. Now you’re going to have to cancel it.”

“What’s the other thing?”

“My feet hurt.”

Cassidy shook his head admiringly. “You know a great deal for a man who
couldn’t possibly have any evidence of any kind of any of the things you
suggest—except maybe your feet hurting.”

“I don’t need evidence to know these things,” Howell pointed out. “It’s
a feeling I have—feet and all. Oh sure, I’d need evidence if I was going
to prove anything. But since nothing is going to happen now, nothing
needs proving. So let’s all go home and go to bed.”

“A splendid idea. Goodnight to you, Howell.”

_“After,”_ finished Howell, “I have made a phone call.”

“Oh?”

“Yup. The same one you were making.”

“Howell: you’re not detaining me?” asked Cassidy hopefully.

“I am not. I remember what happened to that assistant D.A. who played
like that. I’m merely asking you to stand by while I have a word with
our apprehensive friend Maggie Athenson. We’ll both sleep better if we
know she’s well and happy.”

“Good,” said Cassidy. “It hurts me to have you suspicious.”

“I don’t doubt it,” Howell said. “Lend me a dime.”

Cassidy thumbed a dime out of his tan topcoat. Howell stepped into the
end booth, brushing past Cassidy as he did so. Cassidy was packing a
gun, all right.

Howell dialed Maggie Athenson’s number. There was a pause, and then the
phone burped a busy signal at him.

“Busy,” Howell called.

“Still?” asked Cassidy. “Good old Maggie. Chatty as ever. She’s probably
asking for a boy in blue to camp outside her door.”

“She’s already done that.” Howell reinserted the dime. This time he got
a ringing signal.

And got it. And got it.

“Now she doesn’t answer,” said Howell, coming out of the booth.

“Maybe she’s gone to bed.”

“Uh-uh. The phone was busy fifteen seconds before I rang. No one’s going
to move from his phone into his bed in fifteen seconds.”

He stood in thought for a moment, his weak-looking eyes on Cassidy’s
pink face. There was nothing there.

“Look!” Cassidy pointed through the display window.

Howell whirled. A man dived out of the lighted doorway opposite,
skidded, pounded up the pavement to a yellow convertible which, in
seconds, came to life. It roared and then spun into the street, tail
down, tires burning. It breezed through a red light at the first
intersection, turned right and disappeared.

Cassidy turned from the sight and began to speak, but the detective was
gone. Cassidy turned, swung back, and then saw Howell outside in the
middle of the street, shading his eyes against the streetlight, as he
peered after the convertible. He came back into the drugstore.

“Who was it?” asked Cassidy.

“Later,” grunted Howell, and piled into a booth. He left the door open,
dialed. “Brophy,” he said. Then, “Brophy? Trace a yellow Caddy
convertible, Illinois license YD sixty-ninety-seven, heading north from
here. What for? Passing a red light, of course. I’ll proffer the charge.
Hold him until I can get there to do it. What? Oh—_that_. I’m on it now.
All right.”

“I didn’t know you could move that fast,” said Cassidy.

“Speed is my secret weapon,” said Howell. “I smell homicide. Let’s go
see Maggie, who won’t answer her phone so suddenly.”

“Must I? I have things to do.”

“No, you _must_ not. But come on. This can’t have anything to do with
you.”

“Why, sure.” Howell thought he was going to smile, but he did not.

They crossed the street and entered the apartment hotel. A man with
beetling brows and a heavy jaw stood behind the desk. Howell went to
him. The man raised his eyes with reluctance from the book he was
reading, and moaned with a rising inflection, a sound which probably
meant, “Yes?”

“Did you see someone run out of here a minute ago?”

The man moaned with a falling inflection. Howell ignored these tonal
subtleties and took the accompanying nod for an answer.

“Who was it?”

“A man.”

Howell opened and closed his mouth, and behind him Cassidy chuckled.
Howell showed his badge. “Where was he going?”

“Out,” said the man.

“Can’t get a word in edgewise here,” said Howell to Cassidy. To the
clerk, “Do you know the guy?”

The man shook his head and went back to his book. Howell went on tiptoe,
which made him wince, and peered over the counter at the book. It was
_Little Women_ by Louisa May Alcott.

“Come on, Cassidy,” he said disgustedly.

They went to the automatic elevator, and Howell pushed the button marked
12.

“Fourteenth,” said Cassidy.

“Thanks,” said Howell, pushing the ‘stop’ button and then 14.

“Thanks for what?”

“I wondered if you knew just where Maggie’s apartment was but I didn’t
want to ask you.”

“You’re real downy,” said Cassidy with admiration. “But you could have
asked me. I know old Maggie well. And—I have nothing to hide.”

“Yes,” said Howell, which might have meant anything.

The elevator stopped. Howell let Cassidy lead the way down the hall to
an apartment door. He checked Cassidy’s hand as it approached the
bell-push and, extracting his fountain pen, speared the button with the
butt end of it.

“I like your gloves,” he said. “Chamois. Same stuff they use to take
fingermarks off brasswork.”

Cassidy chuckled again.

There was no answer. Howell rang again, and again. He turned suddenly to
face Cassidy, but the big man’s face was blank and untroubled. Howell
squinted at the lock, and took out a bunch of keys, from which he
selected three.

“This won’t work,” he said. “It never does.” He tried the first. It
didn’t. “I’d hate to pull that lacework bulldog downstairs away from his
reading. He chatters so.” He tried the second key. The door opened.

There was a low, wide living room and a bedroom to the left. In the
corner of the living room was a desk. On it were a cradled telephone, a
great deal of fresh blood, and what appeared to be a tumble of sticky,
red-brown hair.

Howell’s breath hissed out. Cassidy said, “Poor old Maggie.”

Maggie was not old. However, she would certainly get no older than she
was now. She was slumped in the chair, her head on the desk. She had
been a handsome woman in her late thirties. Looking down on what had
happened to her head, Howell reflected grimly that no one could say she
didn’t have brains.

“Cassidy?”

“Mm?”

“Lend me your handkerchief.”

Cassidy raised his eyebrows but handed over the handkerchief. Howell
took it in one hand and his own in the other, and gently lifted the
phone off its cradle. With his pen he dialed Brophy.

Holding the phone by its two ends, he spoke into it.

“Maggie was right after all. Yeah. Thirty-eight or larger. Yeah. Back of
the neck. Not a chance. Him? He has an alibi. Me. Hold him? I can’t hold
him. Yeah—I’ll stick around until you get here with the squad. Right.”
He hung up.

Cassidy said, “Right under your nose. Hell, Howell, that’s a shame.”

Howell squinted vaguely at him. “I know. Your little heart bleeds for
me. You know what I think you are? I think you’re a material witness.”

“No, you don’t. Look it up in your book. The co-discoverer of the body
is not a material witness when the discoverer is a police officer.”

Howell sighed. “Lend me a cigarette.”

Smiling slightly, Cassidy took out a new deck of smokes. On his key ring
was a small knife. He slid the blade out and meticulously slit the
bottom end of the cigarette package, knocked it against the back of his
hand, and passed it to Howell. The detective looked at it.

“So careful,” Howell said. He took a cigarette.

“Well,” said Cassidy, “I’ll be running along. Tough luck, Howell,” he
added, nodding toward what was left of Maggie Athenson.

Howell went to the door with him, seeing to it that Cassidy did not
touch the knob. “Don’t leave town, Cassidy,” he said.

Cassidy did smile, this time. He said nothing, and left. Howell opened
and closed his hands, looked at them, sighed, and sat down to wait for
the squad. And to think.

Two hours later they were back at headquarters. Howell’s stocking feet
were on the windowsill. Brophy strode up and down the room, mauling the
case report by swatting it angrily against the desk every time he passed
it.

“No prints—only Maggie Athenson’s,” said Brophy for the fifteenth time.
“No gun. No yellow Caddy. And just like you said—a will in Cassidy’s
favor, and papers showing a business deal that Cassidy could have
engineered to fail, putting Maggie in debt for almost what the insurance
was worth. No proof of anything anywhere. It all points to Cassidy, and
you—”

“I’m his alibi,” said Howell sleepily. “I know. I’m absolutely certain
that he was on his way to knock her off when I met him in the store.
Damn it, she was talking on the phone. He got the busy signal and then I
did. She’d only been dead a few minutes when we got there, which means
she must’ve been killed while I was talking to Cassidy in the store. The
only thing I can think of is that someone just rubbed her out to do
Cassidy a favor.”

“He hired the killer.”

“He did not. Not Careful Cassidy. Listen, Brophy, I know that apple. I
know how he thinks. If he was going to do a job like that—and he
was—he’d do it himself. I’ll tell you one other thing I’m sure of. He’s
leaving town. The money’s going to Halpern—his lawyer, you know—the guy
who handled that false-arrest case for him. Unless I’m dead wrong,
Cassidy will disappear, his lawyer will collect for him, Cassidy will
get the money and we’ll never be able to trace him.”

“Didn’t you say he carries a rod? Let’s get a look at it.”

“Are you kidding? He’d like nothing better. Believe me, any time Cassidy
holds out a chance like that, it’s bait. It could be bluff, but it’s
probably bait. If we move in on him and search him, we’ll find him clean
as a whistle. No, Brophy—you can’t handle Cassidy like anyone else. He
doesn’t move until he’s sure of his loopholes.

“If we do the obvious thing with him, just once, the least that will
happen is that he’ll get off without a scratch and leave a couple of
much-advertised damn fools behind him. The worst that can happen is as
bad as you can dream up. Anyhow, I don’t want to play with him. It’s
what he wants. Somewhere there’s a chance to close on him and get rid of
him for good. Somewhere …”

“It says in the books that every murderer makes at least one mistake,”
said Brophy, sententiously.

Howell snorted. “Not Careful Cassidy. He figures every least little
angle. He does everything like that. Lend me a cigarette.”

Brophy sighed and passed over his tattered pack. Howell took it
absently, looked at it. Suddenly his eyes went round and he sat bolt
upright. Brophy stared aghast at this completely unusual
phenomenon—Howell with his back straight.

Howell threw the cigarettes on the floor, shoved his feet into his
shoes, and without waiting to lace them, galloped out of the room.

“Hey! Come back here—” Brophy stopped, helplessly, and listened to the
slithering pound of Howell’s feet as it diminished down the short flight
of steel-bound steps. “Either that guy gets real bright or he makes
sense,” he muttered. “Never both.”

Brophy picked up the cigarettes, lit one, and sat down to wait …

Howell burst into the drugstore and skated to a stop down the smooth
floor. The clerk faced him across the counter. “Yes, sir,” he said
briskly.

In spite of himself Howell glanced at the clock. It was 4 A.M.

“Do you stand at attention when you sleep?” he asked. “No one should be
that wide awake at this time of the morning. Listen—remember when I was
in here before?”

“Oh, yes, sir.”

“Did you notice that big man in brown I was talking to?”

“Yes, sir. He came in just a minute before you did. He seemed to be in a
hurry. He went straight to the phone booth.”

Howell grunted. He fumbled in his pockets. “Lend me a dime. While you’re
at it, lend me two dimes.”

“But, sir, I can’t afford to—”

“You’re the guy always wants to do something for someone! Come on,”
snapped Howell, extending his hand.

“Very well,” said the clerk stiffly. “But this comes out of my own
pocket.”

“All right, all right. It has your heart’s blood on it. Gimme.”

Howell took the coins and ran to a booth. The clerk watched wall-eyed
while he dialed a number, listened, put the receiver down on the shelf,
and, leaving it there, stepped into the next booth. There he put in the
second dime, dialed, listened again, put this receiver down too, uttered
a wordless shout and ran out.

The clerk waited until his lower jaw stopped swinging, shut his mouth
with an effort, and went to the booths. He hung up the two phones. Each
returned a dime. He stood looking out into the night with slightly
glazed eyes, his lips set in tight lines.

A few minutes later, Howell strode into the lobby of the Cheshire House.
The brutal-looking character stood where he had been before, his eyes on
his book.

“You,” said Howell.

The man turned his face up and followed it reluctantly with his eyes.
“M-m-m?”

“That big man who was with me before. Did you ever see him before?”

The man nodded.

“Tonight?”

The man shook his head.

Howell hesitated, thinking rapidly. The man took the opportunity to go
back to his book.

“Hey,” said Howell suddenly.

The man started at the crackle of his voice, stamped his foot and said,
“Goodness gracious, can’t a fellow get a moment’s peace? What is it
now?”

“Well, smash my tea tray,” said Howell. “I only wanted to ask you if
that big man could have gone out of here without your seeing him.”

“Of course he could. Don’t I have enough to do without watching every
single human _soul_ who goes in and out of here every _minute?_ How can
I answer the telephone and make out cards and hand out keys and write
down morning calls and answer silly stupid questions and watch everyone
who comes and goes too? What do you think I _am?_”

Howell stepped back a pace from this tirade. “We won’t go into that,” he
said. He turned away, paused, said, “Try _The Bobbsey Twins at the
Circus_ next. It’ll kill you,” and raced out.

In the corridor of a lush apartment house uptown, Howell stopped and
regarded the wide unpanelled slab of a door. Soundproofed, he thought.
He sighed; and pressed the buzzer. Nothing happened immediately. He
waited patiently, not ringing again. Finally the door opened a crack.

“Who is it?”

“Howell.”

“Ah,” said Careful Cassidy. “I half expected you. Come in.”

“Thanks,” said Howell.

Cassidy closed and locked the door behind him. “Drink?” he asked.

“Nope.” Howell, holding his breath, lounged through the foyer and
instead of continuing into the living room, turned sharply left into a
bedroom. As he expected, there was a packed suitcase in the middle of
the floor and another one open on the bed. Drawers and a large
clothes-press were open.

Howell made no comment, though Cassidy was obviously waiting for one.
The detective silently and forlornly slumped into a chair.

Cassidy said, easily, “Mind if I go ahead with my packing?”

“Gosh no,” said Howell. “Don’t let me stop you.”

Cassidy smiled at that, and went to the open suitcase. “What’s on your
mind? Did you get the guy with the Cadillac?”

“Nope. I was wondering if you had a lead, Cassidy. Any lead. You knew
the woman.”

“I’d like to help,” said Cassidy with his mouth.

“She left you a pile of dough. Why should someone do you a favor like
that?”

“It’s fate, Howell. Why do some people win sweepstakes?”

“Brophy would like to see you, Cassidy.”

“I’d like to see Brophy, too. A nice guy. But I have to catch a 5:30
plane.”

He turned from the bed and went to get some shirts from a drawer. When
he turned back there was a .38 Smith and Wesson in Howell’s slack hand.
Cassidy put the shirts in the suitcase with exquisite care.

“Howell,” he said in a soft, almost affectionate tone, “you wouldn’t
play it like that, would you?”

Howell looked across and up at the big man, then at the gun in his hand.
“What’s the matter, Cassidy? Jumpy? This thing doesn’t work. I just
wanted to look at it.”

Calmly he broke the gun, shook out the cartridges, and tossed them over
onto the bed. He raised the gun, still broken, and sighted through the
breech end of the barrel at a lamp.

“Can’t figure it out,” he said idly, and put the gun down on the
end-table. “Lend me a cigarette, Cassidy.”

“Some right there on the end-table,” said Cassidy. “Help yourself.”

“I don’t see ’em.”

“I could’ve sworn I left a full pack there. Here—I have more.” From one
of the bureau drawers he withdrew a carton, got a pack from it. Out came
his keys, and the little sharp knife. Carefully he slit the pack,
knocked it on the back of his hand, and tossed it to the detective. “You
can keep ’em.”

“I will. Thanks. Now let’s go down and see Brophy,” said Howell.

Cassidy regarded him thoughtfully. “You’re kidding.”

“No, I’m not. You’re under arrest.”

“What for?”

“Let’s say for breaking the law.”

“That’s childish, Howell. Don’t ask for that kind of trouble. I
specialize in it.”

“I’ll take my chances. If you are that sure of yourself you’ll come
along. Call your lawyer first if you want to.”

Cassidy looked at him and then at the suitcases. “You tempt me,” he said
sincerely. “But I’ve got a plane to catch. I won’t call you, Howell.
Better forget it. But it was a nice try.”

Howell moved his shoulders deeper into the chair cushions. “You’re under
arrest,” he said again. “You’ll come with me, and if you resist you’ll
take the consequences.”

He half closed his eyes—and under the lids saw Cassidy’s gaze flick to
the revolver on the table and then to a large box of bath talc in the
open suitcase.

“I’m taking that plane,” said Cassidy.

Howell and his chair immediately pitched forward. The detective pulled
in his head like a turtle, and his round shoulders struck the floor as
he got his feet on the seat of the chair. As he rolled forward and felt
his spine on the floor, he snapped his body and legs straight. The chair
catapulted, bottom side first, over the bed and into Cassidy’s chest.

Howell completed his forward roll, tucking up tight until his feet were
under him again, and dove into the same trajectory as the chair had
taken. He struck Cassidy just as the big man had fought clear of the
chair, and they all crashed to the floor together.

Howell’s left hand found the angle between Cassidy’s neck and shoulder.
He sank his thumb agonizingly behind the collarbone while with his right
hand he cupped Cassidy’s chin and slammed the big man’s head against the
floor.

Cassidy roared like a wounded bear and brushed Howell off with one sweep
of a thick arm. Howell did not resist, but let himself roll and checked
himself squatting on the tips of his toes, with his arms wide and his
hands lightly on the carpet on each side, ready, catlike, to leap in any
direction, including up.

Cassidy leaped on him, aiming a murderous kick. Howell went down like a
high-speed photograph of a Moslem at prayer, and came up under the kick
with his hand on Cassidy’s ankle. Holding it, he stood up.

Cassidy’s momentum carried him around in a beautiful half-gainer and the
big man landed resoundingly on the back of his head. Howell let go and
the huge body collapsed and lay twitching. Breathing too hard to
swallow, Howell went around Cassidy to the bed and fell on the
powder-box. He twitched off the cover, dug his hands into the talc. The
gun was in there, all right—a .38 automatic. As his fingers closed on it
Cassidy hit him from below and behind.

Howell flicked his wrist and sent the gun flying across the room.
Cassidy’s arms closed around his thighs. He flung himself recklessly
sidewise and smashed the powder-box into Cassidy’s face.

Cassidy uttered a terrifying, retching gasp as he inhaled a large
lungful of the powder, released Howell’s legs, and began clawing at his
face as he reared back on his knees.

Howell stood up. Cassidy’s head came just to the level of Howell’s
hollow chest, just a little lower than the ideal place for a punching
bag. Howell took very careful aim, hauled off and landed an inline,
steam-driven powerhouse punch that collapsed the big man like a balloon.

Hauling the heavy hulk next to the bed, he sat it up, pulled the hands
together behind it, and handcuffed them after passing the cuff chain
around the leg of the bed. Then he went to the phone.

Halpern, the lawyer, had sharp eyes, profile, teeth and trouser-creases.
He sat next to Cassidy in the night court, fussing soothingly over his
blackly furious client. Across the aisle Howell lounged and Brophy
jittered.

The judge fined a frightened-looking man twelve dollars for throwing a
bottle at his wife, after assuring him that his bad aim had saved him a
lot of money, and called up the next case. Halpern leaped to his feet.

“Your Honor, I submit that my client has been falsely arrested on vague
and negligible charges. I demand that he be immediately released, that
the case be thoroughly investigated, that the offending officers be
disciplined, and that the municipal government give him restitution for
the battery, indignity, and anguish which he has suffered.”

“Who is the arresting officer?”

Howell climbed wearily to his feet. From his pocket he extracted a pack
of cigarettes. “These yours?” he asked Cassidy.

He handed them to Halpern. Halpern and Cassidy huddled over them for a
moment, whispering. Finally Cassidy gave an affirmative grunt.

“Opened by you?” pursued Howell.

Cassidy said, “I always open ’em that way. So what?”

Howell took the pack and slouched with it to the bench. “If your honor
will read the small print on the side of the package …”

The judge looked strangely at Howell, took the pack, adjusted his
bifocals and squinted at the cigarettes “… manufacturer of the
cigarettes contained … complied with all the requirements of law … every
person cautioned not to use either this package for cigarettes again or
the stamp thereon again, nor to remove the contents of this package
without destroying said stamp under the penalties provided by law in
such cases.”

“That was ground for the initial arrest, Your Honor,” said Howell.
“Since I did not know the penalties referred to, I relied on my own
judgment to bring this man into court so that the court could determine
the treatment of such a case. You will notice that the package is slit
open at the bottom, and the stamp is untouched.”

“Trivial!” screamed Halpern. “This is a civil complaint, not a criminal
one. I ob—”

“I’m not finished,” said Howell mildly.

“Proceed,” the judge said to him.

“Mr. Cassidy resisted my arrest,” understated Howell, “and in the course
of doing so unearthed this—” and from his pocket he took a bulky object
wrapped in his handkerchief and put it on the bench—”this .38 automatic.
I submit this as direct evidence to my charge of the murder of Miss
Maggie Athenson.

“You will find that a ballistics test of this gun identifies the bullet
which killed Miss Athenson; that the gun is registered in the name of
Mr. Cassidy; and that a skin test of Mr. Cassidy’s hands will reveal
that he has fired a weapon within the past eight hours. I shall present
further evidence when I have had an opportunity to write up a full
report.”

A paling Halpern turned to a dough-faced Cassidy and slowly raised his
hands, palms upwards, in one long, eloquent shrug.

Back at headquarters, Howell said: “Brophy—lend me a cigarette.”

Brophy handed over the pack, resignedly. “What was with the telephone
gimmick?” he asked.

“One of those simple little things no one ever bothers to tell you,”
grunted Howell when he had his cigarette going. “Cassidy had a very
shrewd idea that a dick would be around, but out of sight. He’d goaded
Maggie into asking for protection before and he knew that when it was
refused a man would be around anyway. Maybe he even knew it would be me.
He always did have fun playing with me.

“What he probably did was to force Maggie at gunpoint to ask for the
protection. When she hung up he killed her, went straight across to the
drugstore, staying out of sight of that pantywaist at the hotel desk,
and dialed her number. So the phone rang and rang and rang.

“When I came into the store he left the booth, _leaving the receiver off
the hook_, and conned me into calling the same number. He very neatly
shunted me into another booth when I called her. Since the phone was
already ringing, I got a busy signal instead of a ring, and assumed she
was on the line.

“It works—I tried it on my home phone. Then when I went back to dial her
again, Cassidy just reached back into the other booth and hung up that
phone. This time I got a ringing signal that nobody answered.”

“I’m damned,” breathed Brophy. “But—how did you ever shake him loose
from the gun?”

“That,” said Howell, and shuddered. “I had to play that just so. I had
him on a charge—that cigarette-stamp thing. It was flimsy as hell, but
it was a legal angle he hadn’t figured on. If I could get him into
headquarters I could get a skin-test.”

“But how did you know you’d find the gun?”

“Oh, the gun had to show! I broke mind, and then told him he was under
arrest. He had the murder gun, and he was certainly going to take it
with him when he lammed, so he could get rid of it. Once my rod was out
of the picture, he had to figure on using his if it came to using one at
all. Only thing was, I had to play it so that he’d locate the gun for me
but wouldn’t get a chance to use it. Otherwise, where’s your skin-test?”

Brophy groaned. “Too close. You’re out of your mind, Howell.”

“Not me,” grinned Howell. “I can go home now and sleep easy without
worrying about guys who like to slap false arrest charges on
hard-working bulls.”

The phone rang. Brophy picked it up. He grunted twice, laughed briefly
and said, “Okay. I’ll tell him.” He cradled the phone and looked up into
Howell’s face with an indescribable expression.

“That,” he said, “was the desk. They just brought in the guy in the
yellow Caddy. He’s an insurance man. Accident insurance. He moved into
the Cheshire yesterday afternoon. He listens in to the police
wavelengths and gives his clients on-the-spot service in accidents.”

Brophy chuckled. “He used to work for the city. He holds a Police
Emergency card and can run through any red light when he’s on a case. He
used to be an assistant D.A. and was broken on a false arrest charge and
for five years now he’s been wanting to do it to someone else. “Who do
you suppose he’s going to sue now, and for what?”

Howell said, mournfully, “My feet hurt.”



FEAR IS A BUSINESS


JOSEPHUS MACARDLE PHILLIPSO is a man of destiny and he can prove it. His
books prove it. The Temple of Space proves it.

A man of destiny is someone who is forced into things—big things—willy,
as the saying goes, nilly. Phillipso, just for example, never meant to
get into the Unidentified (except by Phillipso) Aerial Object business.
This is to say, he didn’t sit down like some of his less honest
(according to Phillipso) contemporaries and say “I think I’ll sit down
and tell some lies about flying saucers and make some money.” Everything
that happened (Phillipso ultimately believed) just happened, and
happened to him. Might have been anybody. Then, what with one thing
leading to another the way it does, well, you burn your forearm on an
alibi and wind up with a Temple.

It was, on looking back on it (something which Phillipso never does any
more), an unnecessary alibi devised for inadequate reasons. Phillipso
merely calls the beginnings “inauspicious” and lets it go at that. The
fact remains that it all started one night when he tied one on for no
special reason except that he had just been paid his forty-eight dollars
for writing advertising promotion copy for the Hincty Pincty Value
Stores, and excused his absence on the following day with a story about
a faulty lead on the spark coil of his car which took him most of the
night to locate, and there he was stranded in the hills on the way back
from a visit to his aging mother. The next night he did visit his aging
mother and on the way back his car unaccountably quit and he spent most
of the night fiddling with the electrical system until he discovered,
just at dawn, a—well, there it was. At a time like that you just can’t
tell the truth. And while he was pondering various credible alternatives
to veracity, the sky lit up briefly and shadows of the rocks and trees
around him grew and slid away and died before he could even look up. It
was a temperature inversion or a methane fireball or St. Elmo’s fire or
maybe even a weather balloon—actually that doesn’t matter. He looked up
at where it already wasn’t, and succumbed to inspiration.

His car was parked on a grassy shoulder in a cut between two bluffs.
Thick woods surrounded a small clearing to his right, a sloping glade
sparsely studded with almost round moraine boulders, of all sizes. He
quickly located three, a foot or so in diameter, equally spaced, and
buried to approximately the same depth—_i.e._, not much, Phillipso being
merely an ingenious man, not an industrious one. These three he lifted
out, being careful to keep his crepe-soled shoes flat on the resilient
grass and to leave as few scuff-marks and indentations as possible. One
by one he took the stones into the woods and dropped them into an
evacuated foxhole and shoved some dead branches in on top of them. He
then ran to his car and from the trunk got a blowtorch which he had
borrowed to fix a leak in the sweated joint of a very old-fashioned
bathtub in his mother’s house, and with it thoroughly charred the three
depressions in the ground where the boulders had lain.

Destiny had unquestionably been at work from the time he had beered
himself into mendacity forty-eight hours before. But it became manifest
at this point, for after Phillipso had licked his forearm lightly with
the tongue of flame from the torch, extinguished the same and put it
away, a car ground up the hill toward him. And it was not just any car.
It belonged to a Sunday supplement feature writer named Penfield who was
not only featureless at the moment, but who had also seen the light in
the sky a half hour earlier. It may have been Phillipso’s intention to
drive into town with his story, and back with a reporter and cameraman,
all to the end that he could show a late edition to his boss and explain
this second absence. Destiny, however, made a much larger thing of it.

Phillipso stood in the graying light in the middle of the road and
flapped his arms until the approaching car stopped. “They,” he said
hoarsely, “almost killed me.”

From then on, as they say in the Sunday supplement business, it wrote
itself. Phillipso offered not one blessed thing. All he did was answer
questions, and the whole thing was born in the brain of this Penfield,
who realized nothing except that here was the ideal interview subject.
“Came down on a jet of fire, did it? Oh—_three_ jets of fire.” Phillipso
took him into the glade and showed him the three scorched pits, still
warm. “Threaten you, did they? Oh—all Earth. Threatened all Earth.”
Scribble scribble. He took his own pictures too. “What’d you do, speak
right up to them? Em?” Phillipso said he had, and so it went.

The story didn’t make the Sunday supplements, but the late editions—just
as Phillipso had planned, but much bigger. So big, as a matter of fact,
that he didn’t go back to his job at all; he didn’t need it. He got a
wire from a publisher who wanted to know if he, as a promotion writer,
might be able to undertake a book.

He might and he did. He wrote with a crackling facility (_The first word
in thrift, the last word in value_ was his, and was posted all over the
Hincty Pincty chain just as if it meant something) in a style homely as
a cowlick and sincere as a banker’s nameplate. _The Man Who Saved the
Earth_ sold two hundred and eighty thousand copies in the first seven
months.

So the money started to come in. Not only the book money—the other
money. The other money came from the end-of-the-world people, the
humanity-is-just-too-wicked people, the save-us-from-the-spacemen folk.
Clear across the spectrum, from people who believed that if God wanted
us to fly through space we’d have been born with tailfins to people who
didn’t believe in anything but Russians but would believe anything of
them, people said “Save us!” and every crack on the pot dripped gold.
Hence the Temple of Space, just to regularize the thing, you know, and
then the lectures, and could Phillipso help it if half the congre—uh,
club members called them services?

The sequel happened the same way, just appendixes to the first book, to
handle certain statements he had made which some critics said made him
fall apart by his own internal evidence. _We Need not Surrender_
contradicted itself even more, was a third longer, sold three hundred
and ten thousand in the first nine weeks, and brought in so much of that
other money that Phillipso registered himself as an Institute and put
all the royalties with it. The Temple itself began to show signs of
elaboration, the most spectacular piece of which was the war surplus
radar basket of a battleship that went round and round all the time. It
wasn’t connected to a damn thing yet people felt that Phillipso had his
eyes open. You could see it, on a clear day, from Catalina, especially
at night after the orange searchlight was installed to rotate with it.
It looked like a cosmic windshield wiper.

Phillipso’s office was in the dome under the radar basket, and was
reachable only from the floor below by an automatic elevator. He could
commune with himself in there just fine, especially when he switched the
elevator off. He had a lot of communing to do, too, sometimes detail
stuff, like whether he could sustain a rally at the Coliseum and where
to apply the ten thousand dollar grant from the Astrological Union which
had annoyingly announced the exact size of the gift to the press before
sending him the check. But his main preoccupation was another book, or
what do I do for an encore? Having said that we are under attack, and
then that we can rally and beat ’em, he needed an angle. Something new,
preferably borne by newsbeat out of cultural terror. And soon, too; his
kind of wonder could always use another nine days.

As he sat alone and isolated in the amnion of these reflections, his
astonishment can hardly be described at the sound of a dry cough just
behind him, and the sight of a short sandy-haired man who stood there.
Phillipso might have fled, or leapt at the man’s throat, but he was
stopped cold by a device that historically guaranteed to stem all raging
authors: “I have,” said the man, holding up one volume in each hand,
“read your stuff.”

“Oh, really?” asked Phillipso.

“I find it,” said the man, “logical and sincere.”

Phillipso looked smilingly at the man’s unforgettable bland face and his
unnoticeable gray suit. The man said, “Sincerity and logic have this in
common: neither need have anything to do with truth.”

“Who are you,” demanded Phillipso immediately, “What do you want and how
did you get in here?”

“I am not, as you put it, in here,” said the man. He pointed upward
suddenly, and in spite of himself Phillipso found his eyes following the
commanding finger.

The sky was darkening, and Phillipso’s orange searchlight slashed at it
with increasing authority. Through the transparent dome, just to the
north, and exactly where his visitor pointed, Phillipso saw the
searchlight pick out a great silver shape which hovered perhaps fifty
feet away and a hundred feet above the Temple. He saw it only
momentarily, but it left an afterimage in his retinae like a flashbulb.
And by the time the light had circled around again and passed the place,
the thing was gone. “I’m in that,” said the sandy-haired man. “Here in
this room I’m a sort of projection. But then,” he sighed, “aren’t we
all?”

“You better explain yourself,” said Phillipso loudly enough to keep his
voice from shaking, “or I’ll throw you out of here on your ear.”

“You couldn’t. I’m not here to be thrown.” The man approached Phillipso,
who had advanced away from his desk into the room. Rather than suffer a
collision, Phillipso retreated a step and a step and another, until he
felt the edge of his desk against his glutei. The sandy-haired man,
impassive, kept on walking to Phillipso, through Phillipso, Phillipso’s
desk, Phillipso’s chair, and Phillipso’s equanimity, the last named
being the only thing he touched.

“I didn’t want to do that,” said the man some moments later, bending
solicitously over Phillipso as he opened his eyes. He put out his hand
as if to assist Phillipso to his feet. Phillipso bounced up by himself
and cowered away, remembering only then that, on his own terms, the man
could not have touched him. He crouched there, gulping and glaring,
while the man shook his head regretfully, “I _am_ sorry, Phillipso.”

“Why are you, anyway?” gasped Phillipso.

For the first time the man seemed at a loss. He looked in puzzlement at
each of Phillipso’s eyes, and then scratched his head. “I hadn’t thought
of that,” he said musingly. “Important, of course, of course. Labeling.”
Focusing his gaze more presently at Phillipso, he said, “We have a name
for you people that translates roughly to _‘Labelers.’_ Don’t be
insulted. It’s a categorization, like _‘biped’_ or _‘omnivorous.’_ It
means the mentality that verbalizes or it can’t think.”

“Who are you?”

“Oh, I do beg your pardon. Call me—uh, well, call me Hurensohn. I
suggest that because I know you have to call me something, because it
doesn’t matter what you call me, and because it’s the sort of thing
you’ll be calling me once you find out why I’m here.”

“I don’t know what you’re talking about.”

“Then by all means let’s discuss the matter until you do.”

“D-discuss what?”

“I don’t have to show you that ship out there again?”

“Please,” said Phillipso, “don’t.”

“Now look,” said Hurensohn gently, “there is nothing to fear, only a
great deal to explain. Please straighten up and take the knots out of
your thorax. That’s better. Now sit down calmly and we’ll talk the whole
thing over. _There_, that’s _fine!_” As Phillipso sank shakily into his
desk chair, Hurensohn lowered himself into the easy chair which flanked
it. Phillipso was horrified to see the half-inch gap of air which, for
five seconds or so, separated the man from the chair. Then Hurensohn
glanced down, murmured an apology, and floated down to contact the
cushion somewhat more normally. “Careless, sometimes,” he explained. “So
many things to keep in mind at once. You get interested, you know, and
next thing you’re buzzing around without your light-warp of forgetting
your hypno-field when you go in swimming, like that fool in Loch Ness.”

“Are you really a—a—an extraulp?”

“Oh, yes, indeed. Extra-terrestrial, extra-solar, extra-galactic—all
that.”

“You don’t, I mean, I don’t see any—”

“I know I don’t look like one. I don’t look like this”—he gestured down
his gray waistcoat with the tips of all his fingers—“either. I could
show you what I really do look like, but that’s inadvisable. It’s been
tried.” He shook his head sadly, and said again, “Inadvisable.”

“Wh-what do you want?”

“Ah. Now we get down to it. How would you like to tell the world about
me—about us?”

“Well, I already—”

“I mean, the _truth_ about us.”

“From the evidence I already have—” Phillipso began with some heat. It
cooled swiftly. Hurensohn’s face had taken on an expression of
unshakable patience; Phillipso was suddenly aware that he could rant and
rave and command and explain from now until Michaelmas, and this
creature would simply wait him out. He knew, too (though he kept it well
below the conscious area) that the more he talked the more he would
leave himself open to contradiction—the worst kind of contradiction at
that: quotes from Phillipso. So he dried right up and tried the other
tack. “All right,” he said humbly. “Tell me.”

“Ah …” It was a long-drawn-out sound, denoting deep satisfaction. “I
think I’ll begin by informing you that you have, quite without knowing
it, set certain forces in motion which can profoundly affect mankind for
hundreds, even thousands of years.”

“Hundreds,” breathed Phillipso, his eye beginning to glow. “Even
thousands.”

“That is not a guess,” said Hurensohn. “It’s a computation. And the
effect you have on your cultural matrix is—well, let me draw an analogy
from your own recent history. I’ll quote something: ‘_Long had part of
the idea; McCarthy had the other part. McCarthy got nowhere, failed with
his third party, because he attacked and destroyed but didn’t give. He
appealed to hate, but not to greed, no what’s-in-it-for-me, no pork
chops.’_ That’s from the works of a reformed murderer who now writes
reviews for the _New York Herald Tribune_.”

“What has this to do with me?”

“You,” said Hurensohn, “are the Joseph McCarthy of saucer-writers.”

Phillipso’s glow increased. “My,” he sighed.

“And,” said Hurensohn, “you may profit by his example. If that be—no,
I’ve quoted enough. I see you are not getting my drift, anyway. I shall
be more explicit. We came here many years ago to study your interesting
little civilization. It shows great promise—so great that we have
decided to help you.”

“Who needs help?”

“Who needs help?” Hurensohn paused for a long time, as if he had sent
away somewhere for words and was waiting for them to arrive. Finally, “I
take it back. I won’t be more explicit. If I explained myself in detail
I would only sound corny. Any rephrasing of the Decalogue sounds corny
to a human being. Every statement of every way in which you need help
has been said and said. You are cursed with a sense of rejection, and
your rejection begets anger and your anger begets crime and your crime
begets guilt; and all your guilty reject the innocent and destroy their
innocence. Riding this wheel you totter and spin, and the only basket in
which you can drop your almighty insecurity is an almighty fear, and
anything that makes the basket bigger is welcome to you … Do you begin
to see what I am talking about, and why I’m talking to you?

“Fear is your business, your stock in trade. You’ve gotten fat on it.
With humanity trembling on the edge of the known, you’ve found a new
unknown to breed fear in. And this one’s a honey; it’s infinite. Death
from space … and every time knowledge lights a brighter light and drives
the darkness back, you’ll be there to show how much wider the
circumference of darkness has become … Were you going to say something?”

“I am _not_ getting fat,” said Phillipso.

“Am I saying anything?” breathed the sandy-haired man. “Am I here at
all?”

In all innocence Phillipso pointed out, “You said you weren’t.”

Hurensohn closed his eyes and said in tones of sweet infinite patience,
“Listen to me, Phillipso, because I now fear I shall never speak to you
again. Whether or not you like it—and you do, and we don’t—you have
become the central clearinghouse for the Unidentified Aerial Object. You
have accomplished this by lies and by fear, but that’s now beside the
point—you accomplished it. Of all countries on earth, this is the only
one we can effectively deal with; the other so-called Great Powers are
constitutionally vindictive, or impotent, or hidebound, or all three. Of
all the people in this country we could deal with—in government, or the
great foundations, or the churches—we can find no one who could overcome
the frenzy and foolishness of your following. You have forced us to deal
with you.”

“My,” said Phillipso.

“Your people listen to you. More people than you know listen to your
people—frequently without knowing it themselves. You have something for
everyone on earth who feels small, and afraid, and guilty. You tell them
they are right to be afraid, and that makes them proud. You tell them
that the forces ranged against them are beyond their understanding, and
they find comfort in each other’s ignorance. You say the enemy is
irresistible, and they huddle together in terror and are unanimous. And
at the same time you except yourself, implying that you and you alone
can protect them.”

“Well,” said Phillipso, “if you have to deal with me … isn’t it so?”

“It is not,” said Hurensohn flatly. “ _‘Protect’_ presupposes
_‘attack.’_ There is no attack. We came here to help.”

“Liberate us,” said Phillipso.

“Yes. _No!_” For the first time Hurensohn showed a sign of irritation.
“Don’t go leading me into your snide little rat-shrewd pitfalls,
Phillipso! By liberate I meant make free; what you meant is what the
Russians did to the Czechs.”

“All right,” said Phillipso guardedly. “You want to free us. Of what?”

“War. Disease. Poverty. Insecurity.”

“Yes,” said Phillipso. “It’s corny.”

“You don’t believe it.”

“I haven’t thought about it one way or the other yet,” said Phillipso
candidly. “Maybe you can do all you say. What is it you want from me?”

Hurensohn held up his hands. Phillipso blinked as _The Man Who Saved the
Earth_ appeared in one of them and _We Need not Surrender_ in the other.
He then realized that the actual volumes must be in the ship. Some of
his incipient anger faded; some of his insipid pleasure returned.
Hurensohn said, “These. You’ll have to retract.”

“What do you mean retract?”

“Not all at once. You’re going to write another book, aren’t you? Of
course; you’d have to.” There was the slightest emphasis on _“you’d”_
and Phillipso did not like it. However, he said nothing. Hurensohn went
on: “You could make new discoveries. Revelations, if you like.
Interpretations.”

“I couldn’t do that.”

“You’d have all the help in the world. Or out of it.”

“Well, but what for?”

“To draw the poison of those lies of yours. To give us a chance to show
ourselves without getting shot on sight.”

“Can’t you protect yourselves against that?”

“Against the bullets, certainly. Not against what pulls the triggers.”

“Suppose I go along with you?”

“I told you! No poverty, no insecurity, no crime, no—”

“No Phillipso.”

“Oh. You mean, what’s in it for you? Can’t you see? You’d make possible
a new Eden, the flowering of your entire specie—a world where men
laughed and worked and loved and achieved, where a child could grow up
unafraid and where, for the first time in your history, human beings
would understand one another when they spoke. You could do this—just
you.”

“I can see it,” said Phillipso scathingly. “All the world on the village
green and me with them, leading a morris dance. I couldn’t live that
way.”

“You’re suddenly very cocky, Mister Phillipso,” said Hurensohn with a
quiet and frightening courtesy.

Phillipso drew a deep breath. “I can afford to be,” he said harshly.
“I’ll level with you, bogeyman.” He laughed unpleasantly. “Good, huh.
Bogey. That’s what they call you when they—”

“—get us on a radar screen. I know. I know. Get to the point.”

“Well. All right then. You asked for it.” He got to his feet. “You’re a
phony. You can maybe do tricks with mirrors, maybe even hide the
mirrors, but that’s it. If you could do a tenth of what you say, you
wouldn’t have to come begging. You’d just … do it. You’d just walk in
and take over. By God, I would.”

“You probably would,” said Hurensohn, with something like astonishment.
No, it was more like an incredulous distaste. He narrowed his eyes. For
a brief moment Phillipso thought it was part of his facial expression,
or the beginning of a new one, and then he realized it was something
else, a concentration, a—

He shrieked. He found himself doing something proverbial, unprintable,
and not quite possible. He didn’t want to do it—with all his mind and
soul he did not want to, but he did it nonetheless.

“If and when I want you to,” said Hurensohn calmly, “you’ll do that in
the window of Bullock’s Wilshire at high noon.”

“Please …”

“I’m not doing anything,” said Hurensohn. He laughed explosively, put
his hands in his jacket pockets, and—worst of all, he watched. “Go to
it, boy.”

_“Please!”_ Phillipso whimpered.

Hurensohn made not the slightest detectable move, but Phillipso was
suddenly free. He fell back into his chair, sobbing with rage, fear, and
humiliation. When he could find a word at all, it came out between the
fingers laced over his scarlet face, and was, “Inhuman. That
was … inhuman.”

“Uh-huh,” agreed Hurensohn pleasantly. He waited until the walls of
outrage expanded enough to include him, recoil from him, and return to
the quivering Phillipso, who could then hear when he was spoken to.
“What you’ve got to understand,” said Hurensohn, “is that we don’t do
what we can do. We can, I suppose, smash a planet, explode it, drop it
into the sun. You can, in that sense, catch worms. You don’t, though,
and wouldn’t. In your idiom you _couldn’t_. Well then, neither can we
force humanity into anything without its reasoned consent. You can’t
understand that, can you? Listen: I’ll tell you just how far it goes. We
couldn’t even force _one_ human to do what we want done. You, for
example.”

“You-you just did, though.”

Hurensohn shuddered—a very odd effect, rather like that on a screen when
one thumps a slide-projector with the heel of one’s hand. “A
demonstration, that’s all. Costly, I may add. I won’t get over it as
soon as you will. To make a point, you might say, I had to eat a
bedbug.” Again the flickering shudder. “But then, people have gone
farther than that to put an idea over.”

“I could refuse?” Phillipso said, timidly.

“Easily.”

“What would you do to me?”

“Nothing.”

“But you’d go ahead and—”

Hurensohn was shaking his head as soon as Phillipso began to speak.
“We’d just go. You’ve done too much damage. If you won’t repair it,
there’s no way for us to do it unless we use force, and we can’t do
that. It seems an awful waste, though. Four hundred years of
observation … I wish I could tell you the trouble we’ve gone to, trying
to watch you, _learn_ you, without interfering. Of course, it’s been
easier since Kenneth Arnold and the noise he made about us.”

“Easier?”

“Lord, yes. You people have a talent—really, a genius for making
rational your unwillingness to believe your own eyes. We got along
famously after the weather-balloon hypothesis was made public. It’s so
easy to imitate a weather balloon. Pokey, though. The greatest boon of
all was that nonsense about temperature inversions. It’s quite a trick
to make a ship behave like automobile headlights on a distant mountain
or the planet Venus, but temperature inversions?” He snapped his
fingers. “Nothing to it. Nobody understands ’em so they explain
everything. We thought we had a pretty complete tactical manual on
concealment, but did you see the one the U.S. Air Force got out? Bless
’em! It even explains the mistakes we make. Well, most of them, anyway.
That idiot in Loch Ness—”

“Wait, wait!” Phillipso wailed. “I’m trying to find out what I’m
supposed to do, what will happen, and you sit there and go _on_ so!”

“Yes, yes of course. You’re quite right. I was just blowing words over
my tongue to try to get the taste of you out of my mouth. Not that I
really have a mouth, and that would make a tongue sort of frustrated,
wouldn’t it? Figure of speech, you know.”

“Tell me again. This Paradise on earth—how long is it supposed to take?
How would you go about it?”

“Through your next book, I suppose. We’d have to work out a way to
counteract your other two without losing your audience. If you jump
right into line and say how friendly and wise we aliens are, the way
Adamski and Heard did, you’ll only disappoint your followers. I know!
I’ll give you a weapon against these—uh—bogeymen of yours. A simple
formula, a simple field generator. We’ll lay it out so anyone can use
it, and bait it with some of your previous nonsense—beg pardon, I might
have meant some of your previous statements. Something guaranteed to
defend Earth against the—uh—World Destroyers.” He smiled. It was rather
a pleasant sight. “It would, too.”

“What do you mean?”

“Well, if we claimed that the device had an effective range of fifty
feet and it actually covered, say, two thousand square miles, and it was
easy and cheap to build, and the plans were in every copy of your new
book … let’s see now, we’d have to pretend to violate a little security,
too, so the people who aren’t afraid would think they were
stealing … hmmm.”

“Device, device—_what_ device?”

“Oh, a—” Hurensohn came up out of his reverie. “Labeling again, dammit.
I’ll have to think a minute. You have no name for such a thing.”

“Well, what is it supposed to do?”

“Communicate. That is, it makes complete communications possible.”

“We get along pretty well.”

“Nonsense! You communicate with labels—words. Your words are like a
jumble of packages under a Christmas tree. You know who sent each one
and you can see its size and shape, and sometimes it’s soft or it
rattles or ticks. But that’s all. You don’t know _exactly_ what it means
and you won’t until you open it. That’s what this device will do—open
your words to complete comprehension. If every human being, regardless
of language, age or background, understood exactly what every other
human being wanted, and knew at the same time that he himself
understood, it would change the face of the earth. Overnight.”

Phillipso sat and thought that one out. “You couldn’t bargain,” he said
at length. “You couldn’t—uh—explain a mistake, even.”

“You could explain it,” said Hurensohn. “It’s just that you couldn’t
excuse it.”

“You mean every husband who—ah—flirted, every child who played hookey,
every manufacturer who—”

“All that.”

“Chaos,” whispered Phillipso. “The very structure of—”

Hurensohn laughed pleasantly. “You know what you’re saying, Phillipso.
You’re saying that the basic structure of your whole civilization is
lies and partial truths, and that without them it would fall apart. And
you’re quite right.” He chuckled again. “Your Temple of Space, just for
example. What do you think would happen to it if all your sheep knew
what their Shepherd was and what was in the shepherd’s mind?”

“What are you trying to do—tempt me with all this?”

Most gravely Hurensohn answered him, and it shocked Phillipso to the
marrow when he used his first name to do it. “I am, Joe, with all my
heart I am. You’re right about the chaos, but such a chaos should happen
to mankind or any species like it. I will admit that it would strike
civilization like a mighty wind, and that a great many structures would
fall. But there would be no looters in the wreckage, Joe. No man would
take advantage of the ones who fell.”

“I know something about human beings,” Phillipso said in a flat, hurt
voice. “And I don’t want ’em on the prowl when I’m down. Especially when
they don’t have anything. God.”

Hurensohn shook his head sadly. “You don’t know enough, then. You have
never seen the core of a human being, a part which is not afraid, and
which understands and is understood.” Hurensohn searched his face with
earnest eyes.

“Have you?”

“I have. I see it now. I see it in you all. But then, I see more than
you do. You could see as much; you all could. Let me do it, Joe. Help
me. Help me, _please_.”

“And lose everything I’ve worked so hard to—”

“Lose? Think of the gain! Think of what you’d do for the whole world!
Or—if it means any more to you—turn the coin over. Think of what you’ll
carry with you if you don’t help us. Every war casualty, every death
from preventable disease, every minute of pain in every cancer patient,
every stumbling step of a multiple sclerosis victim, will be on your
conscience from the moment you refuse me.

“Ah, think, Joe—_think!_”

Phillipso slowly raised his eyes from his clenched hands to Hurensohn’s
plain, intense face. Higher, then, to the dome and through it. He raised
his hands and pointed. “Pardon me,” he said shakily, “but your ship is
showing.”

“Pshaw,” said Hurensohn surprisingly. “Dammit, Phillipso, you’ve gone
and made me concentrate, and I’ve let go the warp-matrix and fused my
omicron. Take a minute or two to fix. I’ll be back.” And he disappeared.
He didn’t go anywhere; he just abruptly wasn’t.

Josephus Macardle Phillipso moved like a sleepwalker across the round
room and stood against the plexiglas, staring up and out at the shining
ship. It was balanced and beautiful, dusty-textured and untouchable like
a moth’s wing. It was lightly phosphorescent, flaring in the orange glow
of the slashing searchlight, dimming rapidly almost to blackness just as
the light cut at it again.

He looked past the ship to the stars, and in his mind’s eye, past them
to the stars again, and stars, and whole systems of stars which in their
remoteness looked like stars again, and stars again. He looked down
then, to the ground under the Temple and down again to its steep slope,
its one narrow terrace of a highway, and down and down again to the
lamp-speckled black of the valley bottom. And if I feel from here to
there, he thought, it would be like falling from crest to trough in the
whorls of a baby’s fingerprint.

And he thought, even with help from Heaven, I couldn’t tell this truth
and be believed. I couldn’t suggest this work and be trusted. I am
unfit, and I have unfit myself.

He thought bitterly, it’s only the truth. The truth and I have a like
polarity, and it springs away from me when I approach, by a law of
nature. I prosper without the truth, and it has cost me nothing,
nothing, nothing but the ability to tell the truth.

But I might try, he thought. What was it he said: _The core of a human
being, a part which is not afraid, and which understands and is
understood_. Who was he talking about? Anybody I know? Anybody I ever
heard of? (“How are you?” you say, when you don’t care how they are.
“I’m sorry,” you say, when you’re not. “Goodbye,” you say, and it means
God be with you, and how often is your goodbye a blessing? Hypocrisy and
lies, thousands a day, so easily done we forget to feel guilty for
them.)

_I see it now_, he said, though. Did he mean me? Could he see the core
of me, and say that?… if he can see such a marrow, he can see a strand
of spider-silk at sixty yards.

He said, Phillipso recalled, that if I wouldn’t help, they’d do nothing.
They’d go away that’s all—go away, forever, and leave us at the mercy
of—what was that sardonic phrase?—the World Destroyers.

“But I never lied!” he wailed, suddenly and frighteningly loud. “I never
meant to. They’d ask, don’t you see, and I’d only say yes or no,
whatever they wanted to hear. The only other thing I ever did was to
explain the yes, or the no; they didn’t start out to be lies!” No one
answered him. He felt very alone. He thought again, I could try … and
then, wistfully, could I try?

The phone rang. He looked blindly at it until it rang again. Tiredly he
crossed to it and picked it up. “Phillipso.”

The phone said, “Okay, Swami, you win. How did you do it?”

“Who is that? Penfield?” Penfield, whose original Phillipso spread had
started his rise from Sunday feature writer; Penfield, who, as district
chief of a whole newspaper chain, had of course long since forsworn
Phillipso …

“Yeah, Penfield,” drawled the pugnacious, insulting voice. “Penfield who
promised you faithfully that never again would these papers run a line
about you and your phony space war.”

“What do you want, Penfield?”

“So you win, that’s all. Whether I like it or not, you’re news again.
We’re getting calls from all over the country. There’s a flight of F-84s
on the way from the Base. There’s a TV mobile unit coming up the
mountain to get that flying saucer of yours on network, and four queries
already from INS. I don’t know how you’re doing it, but you’re news, so
what’s your lousy story?”

Phillipso glanced up over his shoulder at the ship. The orange
searchlight set it to flaming once, once again, while the telephone
urgently bleated his name. Around came the light, and—

And nothing. It was gone. The ship was gone. “Wait!” cried Phillipso
hoarsely. But it was gone.

The phone gabbled at him. Slowly he turned back to it. “Wait,”he said to
it too. He put down the instrument and rubbed water out of his eyes.
Then he picked up the phone again.

“I saw from here,” said the tinny voice. “It’s gone. What was it? What’d
you do?”

“Ship,” said Phillipso. “It was a spaceship.”

_“ ‘It was a spaceship,’ ”_ Penfield repeated in the voice of a man
writing on a pad. “So come on, Phillipso. What happened? Aliens came
down and met you face to face, that it?”

“They—yes.”

“ ‘Face … to … face’ Got it. What’d they want?” A pause, then, angrily,
“Phillipso, you there? Dammit, I got a story to get out here. What’d
they want? They beg for mercy, want you to lay off?”

Phillipso wet his lips, “Well, yes. Yes, they did.”

“What’d they look like?”

“I—they … there was only one.”

Penfield growled something about pulling teeth. “All right, only one.
_One what?_ Monster, spider, octopus—come _on_, Phillipso!”

“It … well, it wasn’t a man, exactly.”

“A girl,” said Penfield excitedly. “A girl of unearthly beauty. How’s
that? They’ve threatened you before. Now they came to beguile you, and
so on. How’s that?”

“Well, I—”

“I’ll quote you. ‘_Unearthly_ … mmm … _and refused_ … mmm,
_temptation_.’ ”

“Penfield, I—”

“Listen, Swami, that’s all you get. I haven’t time to listen to any more
of your crap. I’ll give you this in exchange, though. Just a friendly
warning, and besides, I want this story to hold up through tomorrow
anyhow. ATIC and the FBI are going to be all over that Temple of your
like flies on a warm marshmallow. You better hide the pieces of that
balloon or whatever else the trick was. When it reaches the point of
sending out a flight of jets, they don’t think publicity is funny.”

“Penfield, I—” But the phone was dead. Phillipso hung up and whirled to
the empty room. “You _see?_” he wept. “You see what they make me do?”

He sat down heavily. The phone range again. New York, the operator said.
It was Jonathan, his publisher. “Joe! Your line’s been busy. Great work,
fella. Heard the bulletin on TV. How’d you do it? Never mind. Give me
the main facts. I’ll have a release out first thing in the morning. Hey,
how soon can you get the new book done? Two weeks? Well, three—you can
do it in three, fella. You have to do it in three. I’ll cancel the new
Heming—or the—never mind, I’ll get press time for it. Now. Let’s have
it. I’ll put you on the recorder.”

Phillipso looked out at the stars. From the telephone, he heard the
first sharp high _beep_ or the recording machine. He bent close to it,
breathed deeply, and said, “Tonight I was visited by aliens. This was no
accidental contact like my first one; they planned this one. They came
to stop me—not with violence, not by persuasion, but with—uh—the
ultimate weapon. A girl of unearthly beauty appeared amidst the coils
and busbars of my long-range radar. I—”

From behind Phillipso came a sound, soft, moist, explosive—the exact
reproduction of someone too angry, too disgusted to speak, but driven
irresistibly to spit.

Phillipso dropped the telephone and whirled. He thought he saw the
figure of a sandy-haired man, but it vanished. He caught the barest
flicker of something in the sky where the ship had been, but not enough
to really identify; then it was gone too.

“I was on the phone,” he whimpered. “I had too much on my mind, I
thought you’d gone, I didn’t know you’d just fixed your
warp-whatever-you-call-it, I didn’t mean, I was going to, I—”

At last he realized he was alone. He had never been so alone. Absently
he picked up the telephone and put it to his ear. Jonathan was saying
excitedly, “… and the title. _The Ultimate Weapon_. Cheesecake pic of
the girl coming out of the radar, nekkid. The only thing you haven’t
used yet. We’ll _bomb_ ’em, boy. Yeah, and you resisting, too. Do
wonders for your Temple. But get busy on that book, hear? Get it to me
in fifteen days and you can open your own branch of the U.S. mint.”

Slowly, without speaking or waiting to see if the publisher was
finished, Phillipso hung up. Once, just once, he looked out at the
stars, and for a terrible instant each star was a life, a crippled
limb,a faulty heart, a day of agony; and there were millions on
countless millions of stars, and some of the stars were galaxies of
stars; by their millions, by their flaming megatons, they were falling
on him now and would fall on him forever.

He sighed and turned away, and switched on the light over his
typewriter. He rolled in a sandwich of bond, carbon, second-sheet,
centered the carriage, and wrote

_THE ULTIMATE WEAPON_
_By Josephus Macardle Phillipso_

Facile, swift, deft, and dedicated, he began to write.



THE OTHER MAN


WHEN HE SAW HER AGAIN, he all but yelled—a wordless, painful bleat, one
concentrated syllable to contain five years of loneliness, fury,
self-revilement and that agony peculiar to the victim of “the other
man.” Yet he controlled it, throwing it with a practiced reflex to a
tensing of his abdomen and the transient knotting of thigh muscles
behind the desk, letting the impact strike as it should, unseen.

Outwardly, he was controlled. It was his job to know the language of
eyelids, jaw muscles, lips, and it was his special skill to make them
mute. He rose slowly as his nurse ushered her in and while she took the
three short paces to meet him. He studied her with an impassive
ferocity.

He might have imagined her in old clothes, or in cheap clothes. Here she
was in clothes which were both. He had allowed, in his thoughts of her,
for change, but he had not thought her nose might have been broken, nor
that she might be so frighteningly thin. He had thought she would always
walk like something wild … free, rather … but with stateliness, too,
balanced and fine. And indeed she still did so; somehow that hurt him
more than anything else could.

She stopped before the desk. He moved his hands behind him; her gaze was
on them and he wanted her to look up. He waited until Miss Jarrell
discreetly clicked the door shut.

“Osa,” he said at last.

“Well, Fred.”

The silence became painful. How long did that take—two seconds, three?
He made a meaningless sound, part of a laugh, and came around the desk
to shift the chair beside it. “Sit down, for heaven’s sake.”

She sat down and abruptly, for the first time since she had entered the
office, she looked directly at him. “You look—you look well, Fred.”

“Thanks.” He sat down. He wanted to say something, but the only thing
that would come readily to his lips was, “You’re looking well, too”—such
a patent lie that he couldn’t tell it. And at last he found something
else to say: “A lot has happened.”

She nodded and her gaze found a corner of the tooled leather blotter
frame on the desk. She studied it quietly.

“Five years,” she said.

Five years in which she must have known everything about him, at first
because such a separation is never sharp, but ragged, raveled, a-crackle
with the differed snaps of different threads at different times; and
later, because all the world knew what he was, what he had done. What he
stood for.

For him, five years at first filled with a not-Osa, like a sheet of
paper from which one has cut a silhouette; and after that, the
diminishing presence of Osa as gossip (so little of that, because anyone
directly involved in gossip walks usually in a bubble of silence); Osa
as rumor, Osa as conjecture. He had heard that Richard Newell had
lost—left—his job about the time he had won Osa, and he had never heard
of his working again.

Glancing at Osa’s cheap clothes now, and the new small lines in her
face, he concluded that whatever Newell had found to do, it could not
have been much. Newell, he thought bitterly, is a man God made with only
one victory in him and he’s used it up.

“Will you help me?” Osa asked stridently.

He thought: Was I waiting for this? Is this some sort of reward, her
coming to me for help? Once he might have thought so. At the moment, he
did not feel rewarded.

He sat looking at her question as if it were a tangible object, a box of
a certain size, a certain shape, made of some special material, which
was not to be opened until he had guessed its contents.

_Will you help me?_ Money? Hardly—Osa may have lost a great deal, but
her towering pride was still with her. Besides, money settles nothing. A
little is never enough and helps only until it is gone. A little more
puts real solutions a bit further into the future. A whole lot buries
the real problem, where it lives like a cancer or a carcinogen.

Not money, then. Perhaps a job? For her? No, he knew her well. She could
get her own jobs. She had not, therefore she didn’t want one. This could
only mean she lived as she did for Newell’s sake. Oh, yes, he would be
the provider, even if the illusion starved her.

Then a job for Newell? Didn’t she know he couldn’t be trusted with any
responsible job and was not constituted to accept anything less? Of
course she knew it.

All of which left only one thing. She must be sure, too, that Newell
would accept the idea or she would not be asking.

He said, “How soon can he start therapy?”

She _flickered_, all over and all at once, as if he had touched her with
a high voltage electrode—the first and only indication she had evinced
of the terrible tensions she carried. Then she raised her head, her face
lit with something beyond words, something big enough, bright enough, to
light and warm the world. His world. She tried to speak.

“Don’t,” he whispered. He put out his hand and then withdrew it. “You’ve
already said it.”

She turned her head away and tried to say something else, but he
overrode that, too.

“I’ll get paid,” he said bluntly. “After his therapy, he’ll earn more
than enough—” (For both of us? For my bill? To pay you back for all he’s
done to you?) “—for everything.”

“I should have known,” she breathed. He understood. She had been afraid
he wouldn’t take Newell as a patient. She had been afraid, if he did
take him, that he might insist on doing it free, the name of which was
charity. She need not have worried. _I should have known_. Any response
to that, from a shrug to a disclaimer, would destroy a delicacy, so he
said nothing.

“He can come any time you say,” she told him. This meant, _He isn’t
doing anything these days_.

He opened a desk book and riffled through it. He did not see it. He
said, “I’d like to do some pretty intensive work with him. Six, eight
weeks.”

“You mean he’d stay here?”

He nodded. “And I’m afraid—I’d prefer that you didn’t visit him. Do you
mind very much?”

She hesitated. “Are you sure that …” Her voice trailed off.

“I’m sure I’ll do everything I can to straighten him out, bar nothing.
You wouldn’t want me to say I was sure of anything else.”

She got to her feet. “I’ll call you, Fred.” She watched his face for a
moment. He did not know if she would want to shake his hand or—or not.
She took one deep breath, then turned away and went to the door and
opened it.

“Thank you …”

He sat down and looked at the closed door. She had worn no scent, but he
was aware of her aura in the room, anyway. Abruptly he realized that she
had not said “Thank you.”

He had.

Osa didn’t call. Three days, four, the phone ringing and ringing, and
never her voice. Then it didn’t matter—rather, she had no immediate
reason to call, because the intercom whispered, and when he keyed it, it
said in Miss Jarrell’s clear tones, “A Mr. Newell to see you, doctor.”

Stupidly he said, “Richard A. Newell?”

_Bzz, Psss, Bzz_. “That’s right, doctor.”

“Send him in.”

“I beg your pardon?”

“Send him in,” said the doctor. _I thought that’s what I said. What did
it sound like?_ He couldn’t remember. He cleared his throat painfully.
Newell came in.

“We-ell, Freddy boy.” (Two easy paces; cocked head, half smile.) “A
small world.” Without waiting to be asked, he sat down in the big chair
at the end of the desk.

At first glance, he had not changed; and then the doctor realized that
it was the—what word would do?—the symphonic quality of the man, the air
of perfect blending—it was that which had not changed.

Newell’s diction had always suited the clothes he chose and his
movements were as controlled as his speech. He still wore expensive
clothes, but they were years old—yet so good they hardly showed it. The
doctor was immediately aware that under the indestructible creases and
folds was a lining almost certainly frayed through; that the elegant
face was like a cheap edition printed from worn plates and the mind
behind it an interdependence of flimsy parts so exactly matched that in
the weak complex there was no weakest component. A machine in that
condition might run indefinitely—idling.

The doctor closed his eyes with a brief impatience and consigned the
concepts to the limbo of oversimplified analogies. “What do you want?”

Newell raised his eyebrows a fraction. “I thought you knew. Oh, _I_
see,” he supplemented, narrowing his eyes shrewdly. “One of those flash
questions that are supposed to jolt the truth out of a man. Now let’s
see, just what did pop into my head when you asked me that?” He looked
at the top of the window studiously, then leaned forward and shot out a
finger. “More.”

“More?”

“More—that’s the answer to that question. I want more money. More time
to myself. More fun.” He widened his eyes and looked disconcertingly
into the doctor’s. “More women,” he said, “and better. Just—more. You
know. Can do?”

“I can handle only so much,” said the doctor levelly. His thighs ached.
“What you do with what I give you will be up to you … What do you know
about my methods?”

“Everything,” said Newell off-handedly.

Without a trace of sarcasm, the doctor said, “That’s fine. Tell me
everything about my methods.”

“Well, skipping details,” said Newell, “you hypnotize a patient, poke
around until you find the parts you like. These you bring up by
suggestion until they dominate. Likewise, you minimize other parts that
don’t suit you and drive them underground. You push and you pull and
blow up and squeeze down until you’re satisfied, and then you bake him
in your oven—I’m using a figure of speech, of course—until he comes out
just the proper-sized loaf. Right?”

“You—” The doctor hesitated. “You skipped some details.”

“I said I would.”

“I heard you.” He held Newell’s gaze soberly for a moment. “It isn’t an
oven or a baking.”

“I said that, too.”

“I was wondering why.”

Newell snorted—amusement, patronization, something like that. No
irritation or impatience. Newell had made a virtual career out of never
appearing annoyed. He said, “I watch you work. Every minute, I watch you
work; I know what you’re doing.”

“Why not?”

Newell laughed. “I’d be much more impressed in an atmosphere of mystery.
You ought to get some incense, tapestries in here. Wear a turban. But
back to you and your bake-oven, what-do-you-call-it—”

“Psychostat.”

“Yes, psychostat. Once you’ve taken a man apart and put him together
again, your psychostat fixes him in the new pattern the way boiling
water fixes an egg. Otherwise he’d gradually slip back into his old,
wicked ways.”

He winked amiably.

Not smiling, the doctor nodded. “It is something like that. You haven’t
mentioned the most important part, though.”

“Why bother? Everybody knows about _that_.” His eyes flicked to the
walls and he half-turned to look behind him. “Either you have no vanity
or you have more than anyone, Fred. What did you do with all the letters
and citations that any human being would frame and hang? Where’s all the
plaques that got so monotonous on the newscasts?” He shook his head. “It
can’t be no vanity, so it must be more than anyone. You must feel that
this whole plant—you yourself—are your citation.” He laughed, the
professional friendly laugh of a used-car salesman. “Pretty stuffy,
Freddy.”

The doctor shrugged.

“I know what the publicity was for,” said Newell. “A fiendish plot to
turn you into a personality kid for the first time in your life.” Again
the engaging smile. “It isn’t hard to get you off the subject, Freddy
boy.”

“Yes, it is,” said the doctor without heat. “I was just making the point
that what I do here is in accordance with an ethical principle which
states that any technique resulting in the destruction of individual
personality, surgical or otherwise, is murder. Your remarks on its being
publicly and legally accepted now are quite appropriate. If you must use
that analogy about taking a patient all apart and putting him together
again in a different and better way, you should add that none of the
parts are replaced with new ones and none are left out. Everything you
have now, you’ll have after your therapy.”

“All of which,” said Newell, his eyes twinkling, “is backed up by the
loftiest set of ethics since Mohandas K. Gandhi.”

The twinkle disappeared behind a vitreous screen. The voice was still
soft. “Do you suppose I’d be fool enough to put myself in your
hands—_your_ hands—if I hadn’t swallowed you and your legendary ethics
down to here?” He jabbed himself on the chest. “You’re so rammed full of
ethical conduct, you don’t have room for an honest insult. You have
ethics where most people carry their guts.”

“Why did you come here,” asked the doctor calmly, “if you feel that much
animosity?”

“I’ll tell you why,” smiled Newell. “First, I’m enjoying myself. I have
a sense of values that tells me I’m a better man than you are, law, fame
and all, and I have seventy-odd ways—one of which you were once married
to—to prove it. Why wouldn’t anyone enjoy that?”

“That was ‘first.’ You’ve got a ‘secondly’?”

“A beaut,” said Newell. “This one’s for kicks too: I think I’m the
toughest nut you’ve ever had to crack. I’m real happy about the way I
am—all I want is _more_, not anything _different_. If you don’t
eliminate my lovable character or any part of it—and you won’t; you’ve
stacked the deck against yourself—you’ll wind up with just what you see
before you, hi-fi amplified. And just for a little salt in the stew, I
might as well tell you that I know you can’t operate well without
hypnosis, and I can’t be hypnotized.”

“You can’t?”

“That’s right. Look it up in a book. Some people can’t be hypnotized
because they won’t, and I won’t.”

“Why not?”

Newell shrugged and smiled.

“I see,” said the doctor. He rose and went to the wall, where a panel
slid aside for him. He took up a shining hypodermic, snicked off the
sterile sheath and plunged the needle into an ampoule. He returned to
the desk, holding the hypodermic point upward. “Roll up your sleeve,
please.”

“I also happen to know,” Newell said, complying readily, “that you’re
going to have one hell of a time sorting out drug-reaction effects from
true responses, even with neoscopolamine.”

“I don’t expect my work to be easy. Clench your fist, please.”

Newell did, laughing as the needle bit. The laugh lasted four syllables
and then he slumped silently in his chair.

The doctor took out a blank casebook and carefully entered Newell’s name
and the date and a few preliminary notes. In the “Medication” column, he
wrote, _10 cc neutral saline solution_.

He paused then and looked at the “better” man and murmured, “So you can
run a mile faster than Einstein.”

“All ready, doctor.”

“Right away.”

He went to the rack in the corner and took down a white coat. Badge of
office, he thought, cloak of Hippocrates, evolved through an extra
outdoor duster we used to wear to keep the bodily humours off our street
clothes … and worn today because, for patients, the generalization
“doctor” is an easier departure point for therapeutics than the
bewildering specific “man.” Next step, the juju mask, and full circle.

He turned into the west corridor and collided with Miss Thomas, who was
standing across from Newell’s closed door.

“Sorry!” they said in unison.

“Really my fault,” said Miss Thomas. “I thought I ought to speak to you
first, doctor. He—he’s not completely dismantled.”

“They very frequently aren’t.”

“I know. Yes, I know that.” Miss Thomas made a totally uncharacteristic,
meaningless flutter of the hands and then welded them angrily to her
starched flanks.

The doctor felt amusement and permitted it to show. Miss Thomas, his
head technician, was neither human nor female during working hours, and
the touch of color, of brightness in her lack of ease pleased him
somehow.

She said, “I’m familiar with the—uh—unexpected, doctor. Naturally. But
after eighty hours of machine catalysis, I don’t expect a patient to
resemble anything but a row of parts laid out on a laboratory bench.”

“And what does this patient resemble?”

There was a sudden, soft peal of delighted feminine laughter from the
closed door. Together they looked at its bland surface and then their
eyes met.

“Two hundred cycles,” said Miss Thomas. “Listen to her.”

They listened: Miss Jarrell’s voice, a cooing, inarticulate Miss
Jarrell, was saying, “Oh … you … you!” And more laughter.

Miss Thomas said severely, “I know what you’re thinking about Hildy
Jarrell, but don’t. That’s exactly what I did myself.” Again she made
the uncharacteristic fluttery gesture. “Oh-h!” She breathed impatiently.

Because his impulses were kind, the doctor ignored most of this and
picked up only, “Two hundred cycles. What do you get at the other
frequencies?”

“Oh, that’s all right, all of it. Average responses. Pertherapeutic
personality responds best at eighty cycles. Everywhere else, he’s nice
and accessible. Anyway,” she said a little louder, obviously to drown
out another soft sudden chuckle from behind the door, “I just wanted you
to know that I’ve done what I can. I didn’t want you to think I’d
skipped anything in the spectrum. I haven’t. It’s just that there’s a
personality in the 200-cycle area that won’t dismantle.”

“Yet,” he corrected mildly.

“Oh, _you_ can do it,” she said in rapid embarrassment. “I didn’t
mean … I only meant …”

She drew a deep breath and started over. “I just wanted you to be sure
my job’s done. As to what you can do, you’ll handle it, all right.
Only—”

“Only what, Miss Thomas?”

“It’s a pity, that’s all,” she blurted, and pushed past him to disappear
around the corner.

He shook his head, puzzlement and laughter wrestling gently deep inside
him. Only then did something she had said fully register with him:
_“… there’s a personality in the 200-cycle area that won’t dismantle.”_

That woman, he thought, has the kind of precision which might be clouded
by emotion, but nothing would eliminate it. If she said there’s a
personality in the 200-cycle area, she meant just that. A personality,
not a component or a matrix or a complex.

As she herself had put it, after catalysis a patient should resemble
nothing more than a row of parts on a lab bench. Down through the levels
of hypnosis, audible frequencies would arbitrarily be assigned to
various parts of the personality, and by suggestion each part would
respond to its frequency throughout the therapy. Any part could be
summoned, analyzed, then minimized, magnified, stressed or quelled in
the final modulation and made permanent in the psychostat. But at the
stage Newell was in—should be in—these were _parts_, sub-assemblies at
most. What did she mean “a personality” in the 200-cycle area?

She was wrong, of course. _Oh, God_, he thought, _she’s wrong, isn’t
she?_

He opened the door.

Miss Jarrell did not see him. He watched for a long moment, then said,
just loud enough to be heard over the soft thrumming of the 200-cycle
note from the speakers, “Don’t stop, Miss Jarrell. I’d like to see a
little more of this.”

Miss Jarrell flung up a scarlet face.

The doctor said again, quietly but with great force, “Go on, please.”

She turned away to the bed, her back held with a painful rigidity and
her ears, showing through her hair, looking like the tips of bright
little tongues.

“It’s all _right_,” soothed the doctor. “It’s all right, Miss Jarrell.
You’ll see him again.”

She made a soft sound with her nostrils, grinned ruefully and went to
the controls. She set one of them for the patient’s allotted
sleep-command frequency and hit the master switch. There was a gentle
explosion of sound—“white” noise, a combination of all audio
frequencies, which served to disorient the dismantled patient, his
reflexive obedience attempting to respond to all commands at once—for
ten seconds, and then it automatically faded, leaving the 550-cycle
“sleep” note. The patient’s face went blank and he lay back slowly, his
eyes closing. He was asleep before his head reached the pillow.

The doctor stood suspended in thought for some time. Miss Jarrell gently
arranged the patient’s blanket. It was not done dutifully nor as part of
the busyness of waiting for his next move. For some reason, it touched
the doctor deeply and pulled him out of his reverie. “Let’s have the
P.T., Miss Jarrell.”

“Yes, doctor.” She consulted the index and carefully set the controls.
At his nod, she touched the master switch. Again the white noise, and
the deep moo of the 80-cycle tone.

The P.T.—pretherapeutic—personality would be retained untouched
throughout the treatment, right up until the final setting process in
the psychostat, except, of course, for the basic posthypnotic command
which kept all segments under control of the audio spectrum. The doctor
watched the sleeping face and was aware of a most unprofessional desire
to have something other than that untouched P.T. appear.

He glanced at Miss Jarrell without turning his head. She should leave
now, and ordinarily she would. But she was not behaving ordinarily just
now.

The patient’s eyes half-opened and stayed that way for a time. It was
like the soft startlement of a feline which is aware of something,
undecided whether the something deserves more attention than sleep, and
therefore simply waits, armed and therefore relaxed.

Then he saw the eyes move, though the lids did not. Then was the feline
taking stock, but deluding its enemies into thinking it still drowsy.
The man changed like an aurora, which is ever the same while you watch,
but something quite different if you look away and look back again. _I
think in analogies_, the doctor chided himself, _when I don’t like the
facts_.

“Well, Freddy boy,” drawled Richard A. Newell.

Behind him, he heard Miss Jarrell’s almost inaudible sigh and her brisk
quiet footsteps as she turned on the speech recorder, crossed the room
and closed the door behind her.

Newell said, “Nurse is an odd term for a woman built like that. How you
doing, Freddy?”

“Depends,” said the doctor.

Newell sat up and stretched. He waved at the red eye of the recorder.
“Everything I say is taken down and may be used against me, hm?”

“Everything is used, yes. Not—”

“Oh, spare me the homilies, Fred. Transcribe them yourself, do you?”

“I—no.” As he caught Newell’s thought, and knew exactly the kind of
thing the man was going to do next, he felt himself filling up with
impotent rage. It did not show.

“Fine, fine.” Projecting his voice a bit, Newell said over an elaborate
yawn, “Haven’t waked up like this since I was a kid. You know,
disoriented, wondering for a moment where I was. Last bed I was in
wasn’t so lonesome. Missed thirty of those last forty winks, the way she
was all over me. ‘Dick, oh, Dick, please …’ ” he mimicked cruelly. “Told
her to shut up and get breakfast.”

He laughed outright, obviously not at anything he had said, but at the
writhing silent thing within the doctor, which he could not see but knew
must be there.

He glanced again at the pilot light on the recorder and said,
“Mentioning no names, of course,” and the doctor understood immediately
that names would be mentioned, places, dates and interrelationships,
whenever Newell chose … which would be when the suspense ceased to
entertain him. Meanwhile, the doctor could prepare himself for the
behind-the-back gossip, the raised eyebrows of the transcribing typist,
the after-hours debates as to the ethical position on a doctor’s
practicing on the man who had … who was …

The sequence spiraled down to a low level of his personal inferno and
flickered there, hot and smokeless.

“You didn’t tell me,” said Newell. “How you doing? Find the secret of my
success yet?”

The doctor shrugged easily, which was not easy to do. “We haven’t
begun.”

“Thought not.” Newell snorted. “By the time you’re finished, you won’t
have begun, either.”

“Why do you say that?”

“I extrapolate it. I come here, you give me a shot of knockout drops, I
get a sound sleep and wake up rested and cheerful. Otherwise, nothing.
Yet I know that you’ve taken my slumbering corpus, poked it, prodded it,
checked in it and wrung it out, tooted on your tooters, punched cards
and clicked out four miles of computer tapes—for what? I’m still me,
only rested up a little.”

“How do you know we did all that?”

“I read the papers.” When the doctor made no reply, Newell laughed
again. “You and your push-button therapy.” He looked up in recall, as if
reading words off the ceiling. “What’s the claim—82% of your patients
cured?”

“Modulated.”

“Pretty word, modulated. Pretty percentage, too. What kind of a sieve do
you use?”

“Sieve?”

“Don’t tell me you don’t select your patients!”

“No, we take them as they come.”

“Ha. You talk like the Lysenkoists. Remember them? Russian genetics
experts fifty years back. They claimed results like that. They claimed
nonselective methodology, too, even when some of the people supposed to
be breeding split-kernel corn were seen splitting the kernels with a
knife. Even the Communists rejected them after a while.” He flicked a
wolfish glance at the recorder and grinned. “But then,” he said clearly,
“no Communist would reject _you_, Freddy.”

Of the four possible responses which came to him, the doctor could find
none that would sound unlike a guilty protest, so he said nothing.
Newell’s widening grin informed him that his silence was just as bad.

“Ah, Fred, m’boy, I know you. I know you well. I knew a lot about you
five years ago and I’ve learned a lot more since.” He touched the dark
wiry tuft between his collarbones. “Like, for example, you haven’t a
single hair on your chest. Or so I’ve been told.”

Again the doctor used silence as a rejoinder. He could examine his
feelings later—he knew he would; he inescapably must. For now, he knew
that any answer would fall into Newell’s quiver as new arrows. Silence
was a condition Newell could not maintain or tolerate; silence made
Newell do the talking, take the offensive … inform on and expose his own
forces. Silence Newell could use only sometimes; words, always.

Newell studied him for a moment and then, apparently deciding that in
order to return to a target, it was necessary to leave it temporarily,
looked at the compact control panel. “I’ve read a lot about that. Push
one button, I’m a fighting engine. Push another, I lie down with the
lamb. Who was it once said humanity will evolve into a finger and a
button, and every time the finger wants anything, it will push the
button—and that will be the end of humanity, because the finger will get
too damn lazy to push the button?” He wagged his head. “You’re going to
gadget yourself clear out of a living, Fred.”

“Did you read what was written over the entrance when you came here?”
the doctor asked.

“I noticed there was something there,” said Newell amiably, “and no, I
didn’t read it. I assumed it was some saw about the sanctity of the
personality, and I knew I’d get all I could stand of that from you and
your acolytes.”

“Then I think you ought to know a little more about what you call
‘push-button therapy,’ Newell. Hypnosis isn’t therapy and neither is the
assigned audio-response technique we use. Hypnosis gives us access to
the segments of personality and creates a climate for therapy, and
that’s all. The therapy itself stands or falls on the ability of the
therapist, which is true of my school as it is of all others short of
the lobotomists.”

“Well, well, well. I goaded a real brag out of you at last. I didn’t
know you had it in you.” Newell chuckled. “82% effective and you do it
all your little self. Now ain’t you something? Tell me, able therapist,
how do you account for the 18% who get by you?”

“Why do you want to know?”

“I might alter the figures for you. Who are these sturdy souls?”

“Organic defectives,” said the doctor. _And certain others …_ but he
kept that to himself.

Newell shouted, “Touché!” and fell back with a roar of appreciative
laughter. But the doctor saw his eyes close before he closed them,
little windows with all the faces of hate looking out.

The doctor was delighted. He braced himself for the reaction against his
own pleasure which he could always expect from his austere
professionalism, but it did not come. He put this fact away with the
others he knew he must examine later.

Newell was saying, “You can’t have it both ways, Fred. About hypnosis
not being therapy, I mean. What’s this I heard somewhere about certain
frequencies having certain effects, no matter who you are?”

“Oh, that. Yes, some parts of the audio spectrum do affect most people.
The subsonics—fourteen to around twenty cycles, for example, if you use
enough amplitude—they scare people. And beat frequencies between two
tones, where the beat approaches the human pulse, sometimes have
peculiar psychological effects. But these are byways, side phenomena. We
use the ones we can rely on and ignore or avoid the others. Audio
frequencies happen to be convenient, accurate and easy for patients and
therapists to identify.

“But they’re not essential. We could probably do the same thing with
spoken commands or a spectrum of odors. Audio is best, though; the pure
electronic tone is unfamiliar to most people and so has no associations
except the ones we give it. That’s why we don’t use 60-cycles—the hum
you’re surrounded by all your life from AC devices.”

“And what about if you’re tone-deaf?” asked Newell, with an underlay of
gloating which could only mean that he was talking about himself.

“Nobody’s that tone-deaf, except the organic defectives.”

“Oh,” said Newell disappointedly, then returned to the half-sneering
search for information. “And so the patient walks out of here prepared
for the rest of his life to go into a state of estrus every time an
English horn sounds A-440?”

“You know better than that,” retorted the doctor, for once not
concealing his impatience. “That’s what the psychostat is for. Every
frequency the patient responds to is recorded there—” he waved at the
controls—“along with its intensity. These are analyzed by a computer and
compared by another one with a pattern which shows which segments are
out of line—like too much anger or unwarranted fear, in terms of the
patient’s optimum. The psychostat applies dampers on the big ones and
amplifies the atrophied ones until the response matches the master
pattern. When every segment is at optimum—the patient’s, mind you; no
one else’s—the new pattern is fixed by an overall posthypnotic which
removes every other suggestion that has been applied.”

“So the patient _does_ go out of here hypnotized!”

“He walks in here hypnotized,” said the doctor. “I’m surprised at you,
Newell. For a man who knows so much about my specialty, you shouldn’t
need to be lectured on the elementals.”

“I just like the sound of your voice,” Newell said acidly, but the acid
was dilute. “What do you mean, the patient walks in here hypnotized?”

“Most people are, most of the time. In the basic sense, a man is under
hypnosis whenever any one of his senses does not respond to a present
stimulus, or when his attention is diverted even slightly from his
physical surroundings. You’re under hypnosis when you read a book, or
when you sit and think and don’t see what you’re staring at, or when you
bark your shin on a coffee table you didn’t see under bright lights.”

“That’s so much hairsplitting.” Newell didn’t even pause before his next
sentence, which came from quite a different area than his scoffing
incredulity. “Why didn’t you tell me all this when I said I couldn’t be
hypnotized?”

“I preferred to believe you when you said you knew it all.”

Every pretense of joviality disappeared. “Listen, you,” Newell grated,
in the ugliest tone of voice the doctor had ever heard, “you better
watch what you are doing.”

It was time again for silence and the doctor used it. He gave Newell no
choice but to lie there and stare at his own words. He watched the man
regaining his poise, laboriously, hand over hand, then resting, testing,
waiting to be sure he could speak again.

“Well,” Newell said at length, and the doctor almost admired him for the
smoothness of his tone, “it’s been fun so far and it’ll wind up more so.
If you really can do what you say, I’ll make it right with you, Freddy
boy. I’ll really pay off.”

“That’s nice,” said the doctor guardedly.

“Nice? Just nice? Man, I’ll give you a treasure you couldn’t get any
other way. _You_ could never get,” he amended. He looked up into the
doctor’s face brightly. “Nearly five solid years a-building and it’s all
yours. Me, I’ll start a new one.”

“What are you talking about?”

“My little black book. Got everything in it from pig to princess.
Whoever you are, however you feel from time to time, there’s a playmate
in there for you. You could really use it, Freddy. You must have stored
up quite a charge inside since you-know-what,” he said, grinning at the
recording machine. “Fix me up, I fix you up. Fair enough?”

The silence this time was unplanned. The doctor walked to the controls,
dialed 550 and hit the master. The 80-cycle note died, the white noise
took over, and then the 550-cycle sleep command. The doctor felt that
gleaming grin leave the room like a pressure off his back.

He is a patient, the doctor thought at last, out of his hard-held
numbness. He is a patient in a therapeutic environment as detached from
the world as a non-Euclidean theorem. There is no Newell; there is only
a patient. There is no Fred, only a doctor. There is no Osa, only
episodes. Newell will be returned to the world because he has a
personality and it has an optimum, because that is what I do here and
that is what I am for.

He touched the annunciator control and said, “Miss Jarrell, I want you.”

She opened the door almost immediately; she must have been waiting in
the corridor. “Oh, doctor, I _am_ sorry! I know I shouldn’t do anything
like that. It’s just—well, before I knew it …”

“Don’t apologize, Miss Jarrell. I mean it—don’t. You may even have done
some good. But I have to know exactly what influences were … no, don’t
explain,” he said when she tried to speak. “Show me.”

“Oh, I couldn’t! It’s so—_silly!_”

“Go on, Miss Jarrell. It isn’t silly at all.”

Flushing, she passed him with her eyes averted and went to the controls.
She dialed a frequency and activated the master, and as the white noise
roared out, she went to the foot of the bed, waiting. The audio faded,
all but a low, steady thrum—200 cycles.

The patient opened his eyes. He _smiled_. It was a smile the like of
which the doctor had never seen before, though he might have imagined
one. Not, however, on the face of Richard A. Newell. There was nothing
conceivable in Richard A. Newell to coexist with such an expression.

The patient glanced down and saw Miss Jarrell. Ecstatic recognition
crossed his face. He grasped the covers and whipped them over his head,
and lay stiff and still as a pencil.

“You!…” crooned Miss Jarrell, and the blanket was flung down away from
the patient’s head, and he gurgled with laughter. She snatched at his
toes, and he bucked and chortled, and covered up again. “The bumble
bee—” she murmured, and he quivered, a paroxysm of delighted
anticipation—“goes round the tree … and goes bzz … _bzzz_ … BZZ!” and
she snatched at his toes again.

He whipped the blanket away from his face and gave himself up to an
explosion of merriment which was past vocalization—in face, but for that
soft and intense chuckle, he had made hardly a sound.

“You …”

The doctor watched and slowly felt a vacuum in the scene somehow, and a
great tugging to fill it with understanding, and the understanding would
not come until the word “ridiculous” slipped through his mind … and that
was it: This should be ridiculous, a grown man reacting like a
seven-month infant. What was extraordinary was that it was _not_
ridiculous and that it was indeed a grown man, not a mere infantile
segment.

It was a thing to be felt. There was a—a radiance in these bursts of
candid merriment which, though certainly childlike, were not childish.
It was a quality to be laughed with, not laughed at.

He glanced at the audio selector. Yes, this was the 200-cycle response
that Miss Thomas had mentioned. “A personality—” He began to see what
she had meant. He began, too, to be afraid.

He went to the wall rack where the technician’s response-breakdown was
clipped. It was a standard form, one column showing the frequencies
arbitrarily assigned to age levels (700 cycles and the command
suggestion: “You are eleven years old”) and another column with the
frequencies assigned to emotional states (800 cycles and “You are very
angry”; 14 cycles, “You are afraid”).

Once the patient was completely catalyzed, response states could readily
be induced and their episodic material extracted—fear at age three,
sexuality at fourteen, fear plus anger plus gratification at age six, or
any other combination.

The 200-cycle area was blotchy with Miss Thomas’s erasures, but
otherwise blank.

The doctor inwardly shook himself and got a firm grip. He went to the
bed and stood looking down at that sensitive, responsive face.

“Who are you?” he asked.

The patient looked at him, eyes bright, a glad, anticipatory smile on
his lips. The doctor sensed that the man did not understand him, but
that he was eager to; further, that from the bottom of his heart the man
was prepared to be delighted when he did understand. It filled the
doctor with an almost tender anxiety, a protectiveness. This creature
could not be disappointed—that would be inartistic to the point of gross
injustice.

“What’s your name?” the doctor pursued.

The patient smiled at him and sat up. He looked into the doctor’s eyes
with an almost unbearable attention and a great waiting, ready to
treasure whatever might come next if only—if only he could identify it.

One thing’s certain, mused the doctor: this was no infantile segment.
Child, yes, but not quite child.

“Miss Jarrell.”

“Yes, doctor.”

“The initial, the middle initial on the chart. It’s ‘A.’ What does that
stand for?”

After a moment, “Anson,” she said.

To the patient, he said, “I’m going to call you Anson. That will be your
name.” He put his hand on the patient’s chest. “Anson.”

The man looked down at the hand and up, expectantly, at the doctor.

The doctor said, touching his white coat, “Doctor. Doctor.” He pointed
at Miss Jarrell. “Miss—”

“Hildy,” said Miss Jarrell quickly.

The doctor could not help it; he grinned briefly. This elicited a silent
burst of glee from the patient, which was shut off instantly, to be
replaced by the anticipation, the watchful and ready attentiveness. He
burdened the doctor with his waiting and the necessity to appreciate.
Yet what burden was it, really? This creature would appreciate the back
of a hand across the face or two choruses on the _Londonderry Air_.

The doctor poised over the bed, waiting for an answer, and it came:

The burden lay in the necessity not to please this entity, but to do
this thing properly, in ways which would never have to be withdrawn
later. _He trusts me_—there, in three words, was the burden.

The doctor took the patient’s hand and put the fingertips close to his
lips. “An-son,” he said. Then he put the hand to the patient’s own
mouth, nodding encouragingly.

The patient obviously wanted to do it right, too—more, even, than the
doctor. His lips trembled. Then, “An-son,” he said.

Across the room, Miss Jarrell clapped her hands and laughed happily.

“That’s right,” smiled the doctor, pointing. “Anson. You’re Anson.” He
touched his own chest. “Doc-tor.” He pointed again. “Miss Hildy.”

The man in the bed sat up slowly, his eyes on the doctor’s face.
“An-son. Anson.” And then a light seemed to flood him. He hit his chest
with his knuckles. “Anson!” he cried. He felt his own biceps, his face,
and laughed.

“That’s right,” said the doctor.

“Doc … tor,” said Anson, with difficulty. He looked wistful, almost
distraught.

“That’s okay. That’s good. Doctor.”

“Doc-tor.” Anson turned brightly to Miss Jarrell and pointed. “Miss
Hildy!” he sang triumphantly.

“Bless you,’ she said, saying it like a blessing.

While Anson grinned, the doctor stood for a moment grinning back like a
fool and feeling frightened and scratching his head.

Then he went to work.

“Richard,” he said sharply, and watched for a reaction.

There was none, just the happy eagerness.

“Dick.”

Nothing.

“Newell.”

Nothing.

“Hold up your right hand. Close your eyes. Look out of the window. Touch
your hair. Let me see your tongue.”

Anson did none of these things.

The doctor wet his lips. “Osa.”

Nothing.

He glanced at Miss Jarrell. “Anson,” he said, and Anson increased his
attention. It was startling; the doctor hadn’t known he could. “Anson,
listen.” He pulled back his sleeve and showed his watch. “Watch. Watch.”
He held it close, then put it to Anson’s ear.

Anson gurgled delightedly. “Tk tk,” he mimicked. He cocked his head and
listened carefully to the doctor repeating the word. Then, “Wats. Watts.
_Watch_,” he said, and clapped his hands exactly as Miss Jarrell had
done before.

“All right, Miss Jarrell. That’s enough for now. Turn him off.”

He heard her intake of breath and thought she was going to speak. When
she did not, he faced her and smiled. “It’s all right, Miss Jarrell.
We’ll take good care of him.”

She looked for the sarcasm in his face, between his words, back in
recall, anywhere, and did not find it. She laughed suddenly and
heartily; he knew she was laughing at herself, spellbound as she had
been, anxious for the shining something which hid in the 200-cycle area.

“I could use a little therapy myself, I guess,” she said wonderingly.

“I would recommend it to you if you had reacted any other way.”

She went to the door and opened it. “I like working here,” she said,
blushed, and went out.

The doctor’s smile disappeared with the click of the latch. He glanced
once at the patient, then moved blindly to the controls. He locked them
and went back to his office.

Miss Thomas knocked. Getting no answer, she entered the doctor’s office.
“Oh, I beg your pardon, I thought you were still—”

The expression on his face halted her. She took the reports she carried
and put them down on the desk. He did not move. She went to the cabinet,
which slid open for her, and shook two white pills from a vial. She
broke a beam with a practiced flick of the wrist. A paper cup dropped
and filled with ice water. She took it to the doctor. “Here.”

He said rapidly, “What? What? What?” and, seeking, looked the wrong way
to find her voice. He turned again, saw her. “What?” and put his hand
for a moment over his eyes, “Oh, Miss Thomas.”

“Here,” said the technician again.

“What is it?” He seemed to be trying to identify the cup, as if he had
never seen one before.

Because she was kind, Miss Thomas took it another way. “Dexamyl.”

“Thank you.” He took them, swallowed water, and looked up at her. “Thank
you,” he said again. “I seem to be …”

“It’s all right,” said Miss Thomas firmly. “Everything’s all right.”

Some of his control returned and he chuckled a little. “Using my own
therapy on me?”

“Everything _is_ all right, far as I know,” she said, in the grumpy tone
under which she so often concealed herself. She folded her arms with an
all but audible snap and glared out of the window.

The doctor glanced up at her rigid back and, in spite of himself, was
amused. She was daring him to order her out, challenging him not to tell
her what the trouble was. He recalled, then, that she was doubtlessly
gnawed like the Spartan boy by the fox of curiosity she was hiding under
her starch. _There’s a personality in the 200-cycle area that won’t
dismantle … oh, you can do it, but … it’s a pity, that’s all, he
recalled_.

He said, “It’s one of those things of Prince’s.”

She was quiet for so long that she might not have heard him, and I’m
damned, he thought, if I’m going to spell it out for her.

But she said, “I don’t believe it,” and, into his continued silence,
“Morton Prince’s alternate personality idea might be the only
explanation in some cases, but it doesn’t explain this one.”

“It doesn’t?”

“Two personalities in one mind—three or more sometimes. One of his case
histories was of a woman who had five distinct egos. I’m not quarreling
with the possibility, doctor.”

Every time Miss Thomas surprised him, it was in a way that pleased him.
He would, he thought, think that through some day.

“Then why quarrel with this one?” he asked.

Unmasked and unabashed, she sat down in the big chair. They sat for some
time in a companionable, cerebral quiet.

Then she said, “Prince’s case histories show a lot of variation. I mean
one ego will be refined, educated, another rough and stupid. Sometimes
the prime was aware of the others, sometimes not; sometimes they hated
each other. But there was this denominator: If the condition existed at
all, it existed because the alternate ego could communicate and did. Had
to.”

“Morton Prince wasn’t equipped for segmentation under tertiary
hypnosis.”

“I think that’s beside the point,” Miss Thomas said flatly. “I’ll say it
again: Prince’s alternate egos _had_ to emerge. I think that’s the key.
If an ego can’t communicate and won’t emerge unless you drag it out by
the scruff of the neck, I don’t think it deserves to be called an ego.”

“You can say that and yet you’ve seen Ans—the alternate?”

“Anson. Hildy Jarrell told me about the christening. Yes, I can say
that.”

He looked at her levelly and she dropped her eyes. He remembered again
their encounter in the corridor in front of Newell’s door. _Don’t blame
Hildy Jarrell—that’s exactly what I did myself_.

“Miss Thomas, why are you trying to herd me away from this case?”

“Doctor!”

He closed his eyes and said, “You find a segment that you can’t break.
It’s a particularly—well, let’s say that whatever it is, you like it.”
He paused and, exactly in time, said, “Don’t interrupt me. You know very
well that the rock bottom of my practice is that personality is
inviolate. You know that if this is a genuine case of alternate ego, I
wouldn’t touch it—I couldn’t, because the man has only one body, and to
normalize him, I’d have to destroy one ego or the other.

“Now you knew perfectly well that I’d discover the alternate. So the
first thing you do is call my attention to it, and the next thing you do
is give me an argument about it, knowing I’d disagree with you, knowing
that if there was any doubt in my mind, it would disappear in the
argument.”

“Why on earth would I do a thing like that?” she challenged.

“I told you—so I’d get off the case—reset the P.T. and discharge him.”

“Damn it,” said Miss Thomas bitterly.

“That’s the trouble with knowing too much about a colleague’s thought
processes,” he said into midair. “You can’t manipulate somebody who
understands you.”

“Which one of us do you mean?” she demanded.

“I really don’t know. Now are you going to tell me why you tried this,
or shall I tell you?”

“I’ll tell you,” said Miss Thomas. “You’re tired. I don’t want anything
to happen to that Anson. As soon as I found him, I knew exactly what
would happen if you went ahead with Newell’s therapy. Anson would be the
intruder. I don’t care how—how beautiful an intruder he might be, he
could only show up as an aberration, something extraneous. You’d pack
him down to pill size, and bury him so deep in a new-model Newell that
he’d never see daylight again. I don’t know how much consciousness he
has, but I do know I couldn’t bear to have him buried alive.

“And supposing you committed therapy on Anson alone, brought him up like
a shiny young Billy Budd and buried that heel Newell—if you’ll pardon
the unprofessional term, doctor—down inside him somewhere? You think
Anson would be able to defend himself? You think he could take a lane in
the big rat race? This world is no place for cherubim.

“So there isn’t a choice. I don’t know what Anson shares with Newell and
I never will. I do know that however Anson has existed so far, it hasn’t
spoiled him, and the only chance he has to go on being what he is is to
be left alone.”

_“Quod erat demonstrandum,”_ said the doctor, spreading his hands. “Very
good. Now you know why I’ve never treated alternate ego cases. And
perhaps you also know how useless your little machination was.”

“I had to be sure, that’s all. Well, I’m glad. I’m sorry.”

He smiled briefly. “I follow that.” He watched her get up, her face
softened by content and her admiration of him unconcealed.

She bent an uncharacteristically warm gaze on him and moved toward the
door. She looked back once on the way, and once there, she stopped and
turned to face him. “Something’s the matter.”

There were, he knew, other ways to handle this, but at the moment he had
to hurt something. There were several ways to do the hurt, and he chose
the worst one, saying nothing.

Miss Thomas became Miss Thomas again, her eyes like one-way mirrors and
her stance like a soldier. She looked out of herself at him and said,
“You’re going on with the therapy.”

He did not deny it.

“Are you going to tell me which one gets it?”

“Depends on what you mean by ‘gets it,’ ” he said with grim jocularity.

She treated the bad joke as it deserved to be treated and simply waited
for it to go away.

He said, “Both.”

She repeated the word in exactly his inflection, as though she could
understand it better if it were as near as her own lips. Then she shook
her head impatiently. “You can apply just so much therapy and then
there’s a choice to make.”

“There’s this choice to make,” he said, in a constricted tone that hurt
his throat. “Newell lives in a society he isn’t fit for. He’s married to
a woman he doesn’t deserve. If it is in my power to make him more fit
and more deserving, what is the ethical choice?”

Miss Thomas moved close to the desk. “You implied that you’d turned down
cases like this before. You sent them back into society, untreated.”

“Once they sent lepers back untreated,” he snapped. “Therapy has to
start somewhere, with someone.”

“Start it on rats first.”

I am, he said, fortunately to himself. He considered her remark further
and decided not to answer it, knowing how deeply she must regret saying
it.

She said, “Hildy Jarrell will quit when she finds this out.”

“She will not quit,” said the doctor immediately and positively.

“And as for me—”

“Yes?”

Their gazes locked like two steel rods placed tip to tip, pressing,
pressing, knowing that some slight wavering, some side drift, must come
and must make a break and a collision.

But instead she broke. She closed her eyes against tears and clasped her
hand. “Please,” she whispered, “do you have to go through with this?
Why? Why?”

Oh, God, he thought. I hate this. “I can’t discuss it.” That, he thought
painfully, is altogether the truth.

She said heavily, “I don’t think you should.” He knew it was her last
word.

“It is a psychological decision, Miss Thomas, and not a technological
one.” He knew it was unfair to fall back on rank and specialty when he
no longer had an argument he could use. But this had to stop.

She nodded. “Yes, doctor.” She went out, closing the door too quietly.
He thought, What do you have to be to a person so you can run after
someone crying, “Come back! Come back! Don’t hate me! I’m in trouble and
I hurt!”

It took Miss Jarrell about forty minutes to get to the office. The
doctor had figured it at about thirty-five. He was quite ready for her.

She knocked with one hand and turned the knob with the other and flew in
like an angry bee. Her face was flushed and there was a little pale
tension line parenthesizing each nostril. “Doctor—”

“Ah, Miss Jarrell,” he said with a huge joviality. “I was just about to
call you. I need your help for a special project.”

“Well, I’m sorry about _that_,” she began. Her eyes were wide and
aflame, and the rims were slightly pink. He wished he could magic a few
minims of azacyclonol into her bloodstream; she could use it. “I’ve come
to—”

“The Newell case—”

“Yes, the Newell case. I don’t think—”

He had almost to shout this time. “And _I_ think you’re just the one for
the job. I want the 200-cycle entity—you know, Anson—I want him
educated.”

“Well, I think it’s just—_what?_” And as the angry syllable ricocheted
around the office, she stared at him and asked timidly, “I beg your
pardon?”

“I’d like to relieve you of your other duties and put you with Anson
full time. Would you like that?”

“Would I like … what will I do?”

“I want to communicate with him. He needs a vocabulary and he needs
elementary instruction. He probably doesn’t know how to hold a fork or
blow his nose. I think you can do a good job of teaching him.”

“Well, I—why I’d love to!”

“Good. Good,” he said like a department store Santa Claus. “Just a few
details. I’ll want every minute on sound film, from white noise to white
noise, and I’ll want to review the film every day. And, of course, I’d
have to ask you not to discuss this with anyone, on or off the staff.
It’s a unique case and a new therapy, and a lot depends on it. On you.”

“Oh, you can depend on me, doctor!”

He nodded in agreement. “We’ll start tomorrow morning. I’ll have the
first word lists and other instructions ready for you by then.
Meanwhile, I’ve got some research to do. Contact the Medical Information
Service in Washington and have them key in ‘Prince, Morton,’ and
‘Personality, Multiple,’ on their Big Brain. I want abstracts of
everything that has been published in the last fifty years on the
subject. No duplicates. An index. Better order microfilm and send it by
telefax, AA priority.”

“Yes, doctor,” said Miss Jarrell eagerly. “Foreign publications too?”

“Everything any researcher has done. And put a Confidential on the order
as well as the delivery.”

“_Really_ secret.”

“Really.” He concealed the smile which struggled to show itself; in his
mind, he had seen the brief image of a little girl hiding jellybeans.
“And get me the nurses’ duty list. I have some juggling to do.”

“Very well, doctor. Is that all?”

“All for now.”

She nearly skipped to the door. He saw a flash of white as she opened
it; Miss Thomas was standing in the outer office. He could not have been
more pleased if she had been there by his explicit orders, for Miss
Jarrell said, as she went out, “And thank you, doctor—thank you _very_
much.”

Chew on that, Thomas, he thought, feeling his own small vindictiveness
and permitting himself to enjoy it for once.

And: Why am I jumping on Thomas?

Well, because I have to jump on somebody once in a while and she can
take it.

Why don’t I tell her everything? She has a good head. Might have some
really good ideas. Why not?

“Why not?” he asked again into a joyless void. “Because I could be
wrong. I could be so wrong. That’s why not.”

The research began, and the long night work. In addition to the vast
amount of collateral reading—there was much more material published on
the subject of multiple personality than he had realized—he had each
day’s film to analyze, notes to make, abstracts to prepare for computer
coding, and then, after prolonged thought, the next day’s lessons to
outline.

The rest of the clinic refused to stop and wait for this job to be done,
and he had an additional weight of conscience as he concealed his
impatience with everything else but the Newell case. He was so
constituted that such a weight made him over-meticulous in the very
things he wished to avoid, so that his ordinary work took more time
rather than less.

As for the research, much of it was theory and argumentation; the
subject, like reincarnation, seemed to attract zealots of the most
positive and verbose varieties, both pro and con. Winnowing through the
material, he isolated two papers of extreme interest to him. One was a
theory, one an interim report on a series of experiments which had never
been completed due to the death of the researcher.

The theory, advanced by one Weisbaden, was based on a search through
just such material as this. Indeed, Weisbaden seemed to have been the
only man besides himself who had ever asked the Medical Information
Service for this complete package.

From it, he had abstracted statistics, weighed them to suit his theory,
and come up with the surprising opinion that multiple personality was a
twinning phenomenon, and that if a method were found for diagnosing all
such cases, a correspondence would be found between the incidence of
multiple births and the incidence of multiple personalities. So many
births per thousand are twins, so many per hundred thousand are
triplets, and the odds with quads and quints are in the millions.

So, too, said Weisbaden, would be the statistical expectation for the
multiple personality phenomenon, once such cases stopped being diagnosed
as schizoids and other aberrants.

Weisbaden had not been a medical man—he was some sort of actuary—but his
inference was fascinating. How many twins and triplets walked the Earth
in single bodies without any organic indication that they were not
single entities? How many were getting treatment for conditions they did
not have; how many Siamese twins were being penalized because they would
not walk like other quadrupeds; how many separate entities were being
forced to spend their lives in lockstep?

Some day, thought the doctor—as so many doctors have thought before—some
day, when we can get closer to the genetic biologists, when psychology
becomes a true science, when someone devises a cross-reference system
between the disciplines which really works … and some day, when I have
the time—well, maybe I could test this ingenious guess. But it’s only a
guess, based on neither observation nor experiment. Intriguing though—if
only it could be tested.

The other paper was of practical value. A certain Julius Marx—again not
a medical man, but a design engineer with, apparently, hobbies—had built
an electro-encephalograph for two (would anyone ever write a popular
song about _that?_) which graphed each of the patients through a series
of stimuli, and at the same time drew a third graph, a resultant.

Marx was after a means of determining brain wave types, rather than
individual specimens, and had done circuitry on machines which would
handle up to eight people at once. In a footnote, with dry humor, he had
qualified his paper for this particular category: “Perhaps one day the
improbable theories of Dr. Prince might approach impossibility through
the use of such a device upon a case of multiple personality.”

Immediately on reading this, the doctor ordered EEGs on both Anson and
Newell, and when he had both before him, he wished fervently that Julius
Marx had been there with him; he suspected that the man enjoyed a good
laugh, even on himself.

The graphs were as different as such graphs can possibly be.

The confirmation of his diagnosis was spectacular, and he left a note
for Miss Jarrell to track down every multiple personality case he had
rejected for the past eight years and see what could be done about some
further tests. What would come after the tests, he did not know—yet.

The other valuable nudge he got from the Marx paper was the idea of a
resultant between two dissimilar electro-encephalograms. He made one
from the Newell-Anson EEGs—without the use of anything as Goldbergian as
Marx’s complicated device, but with a simple computer coupling. He kept
it in his top desk drawer, and every few days he would draw it out and
he would wonder …

Therapy for Anson wasn’t therapy. Back at the very beginning, Miss
Thomas had said that his was a personality that wouldn’t dismantle; she
had been quite right. You can’t get episodic material from an entity
which has had no subjective awareness, no experience, which has no name,
no sense of identity, no motility, no recall.

There were many parts to that strange radiance of Anson’s and they were
all in the eye of the beholder, who protected Anson because he was
defenseless, who was continually amazed at his unself-consciousness as
if it were an attribute rather than a lack. His discovery of the details
of self and surroundings was a never-ending delight to watch, because he
himself was delighted and had never known the cruel penalties we impose
on expressed delight, nor the masking with idioms we use instead: _Not a
bad sunset there. Yeah. Real nice_.

“He’s good,” Miss Jarrell said to the doctor once. “He’s only
good—nothing else.”

Therapy for Newell was, however, therapy, and not rewarding. The
properly dismantled and segmented patient is relatively simple to
handle.

Key in anger (1200 cycles) and demand “How old are you?” Since anger
does not exist unsupported, an episode must emerge; the danger has an
object, which existed at a time and place; and there’s your episode.
“I’m six,” says your patient. Key in the “You are six years old” note
for reinforcement and you’re all ready for significant recall. Or start
with the age index: “You are twelve years old.” When that is
established, demand, “How do you feel?” and if there is significant
material in the twelfth year, it will emerge. If it is fear, add the
“fear” note and ask “Where are you?” and you’ll have the whole story.

But not in Newell’s case. There was, of course, plenty of conflict
material, but somehow the conflicts seemed secondary; they were effects
rather than causes. By far the largest category of traumas is the
unjustified attack—a severe beating, a disease, a rejection. It is
traumatic because, from the patient’s point of view, it is unjustified.
In Newell’s case, there was plenty of suffering, plenty of defeat; yet
in every single episode, he had earned it. So he was without guilt. His
inner conviction was that his every cruelty was justified.

The doctor had an increasing sense that Newell had lived all his life in
a books-balanced, debts-paid condition. His episodes had no continuity,
one to the other. It was as if each episode occurred at right angles to
the line of his existence; once encountered, it was past, like a
mathematical point. The episodes were easy to locate, impossible to
relate to one another and to the final product.

The doctor tried hard to treat Anson and Newell in his mind as discrete,
totally unconnected individuals, but Miss Jarrell’s sentimental remark
kept echoing in his mind: “He’s good; he’s only good—nothing else,” and
generating an obverse to apply to Newell: _He’s evil, he’s only
evil—nothing else_.

This infuriated him. How nice, how very nice, he told himself
sarcastically, the spirits of good and evil to be joined together to
make a whole man, and how tidily everything fits; black is totally black
and white is white, and together the twain shall make gray. He found
himself telling himself that it wasn’t as simple as that, and things did
not work out according to moral evaluations which were more arbitrary
even than his assigned audio.

It was about this time that he began to doubt the rightness of his
decision, the worth of his therapy, the possibility of the results he
wanted, and himself. And he had no one to advise him. He told that to
Miss Thomas.

It was easy to do and it surprised both of them. He had called her in to
arrange a daily EEG on both facets of the Newell case and explain about
the resultant, which he also wanted daily. She said yes, doctor, and
very well, doctor, and right away, doctor, and a number of other
absolutely correct things. But she didn’t say why, doctor? or that’s
good, doctor, and suddenly he couldn’t stand it.

He said, “Miss Thomas, we’ve got to bury the hatchet right now. I could
be wrong about this case, and if I am, it’s going to be bad. Worse than
bad. That’s not what bothers me,” he added quickly, afraid she might
interrupt, knowing that this must spill over or never emerge again.
“I’ve been through bad things before and I can handle that part of it.”

Then it came out, simple and astonishing to them both: “But I’m all
alone with it, Tommie.”

He had never called her that before, not even to himself, and he was
overwhelmed with wonderment at where it might have come from.

“Miss Thomas said, “No you’re not,” gruffly.

“Well, hell,” said the doctor, and then got all his control back. He
dropped a film cartridge into the viewer and brought out his notes.
Using them as index, he sat with his hand on the control, spinning past
the more pedestrian material and showing her the highlights. He
presented no interpretations while she watched and listened.

She heard Newell snarling, “You better watch what you’re doing,” and
Anson pointing about the room, singing, “Floor, flower, book, bed,
bubble. Window, wheel, wiggle, wonderful.” (He had not known at that
stage what a ‘wonderful’ was, but Miss Jarrell said it almost every hour
on the hour.) She saw Newell in recall, aged eleven, face contorted,
raging at his fifth-grade teacher, “I’ll bomb ya, y’ole bitch!” and at
thirteen, coolly pleased at something best unmentioned concerning a
kitten and a centrifuge.

She saw Anson standing in the middle of the room, left elbow in right
hand, left thumb pressed to the point of his chin, a stance affected by
the doctor when in perplexity: “When I know everything there is to
know,” Anson had said soberly, “there’ll be two Doctor Freds.”

At this, Miss Thomas grunted and said, “You wouldn’t want a higher
compliment than that from anybody, anytime.” The doctor shushed her, but
kindly. The first time he had seen that sequence, it made his eyes
sting. It still did. He said nothing.

She saw it all, right up to yesterday’s viewing, with Newell in a
thousand pieces from what appeared to be a separate jigsaw puzzle for
each piece, and Anson a bright wonder, learning to read now, marveling
at everything because everything was new—teaspoons and music and
mountains, the Solar System and sandwiches and the smell of vanilla.

And as he watched, doors opened in the doctor’s mind. They did not open
wide, but enough for him to know that they were there and in which
walls. How to describe the indescribable _feeling_ of expertness?

It is said that a good truck driver has nerve endings which extend to
the bumper and tail light, tire tread to overhead. The virtuoso pianist
does not will each separate spread and crook of each finger; he wills
the notes and they appear.

The doctor had steered this course of impossible choices by such willing
and such orientation; and again he felt it, the urge that this way is
right now, and there is the thing to do next. The miracle to him was not
the feeling, but that it had come back to him while he watched the films
and heard the tapes with Miss Thomas, who had said nothing, given no
evaluation or advice. They were the same films he had studied, run in
the same sequence. The difference was only in not being alone any more.

“Where are you going?” Miss Thomas asked him.

From the coat closet, he said, “File that material and lock it up, will
you, Miss Thomas? I’ll call you as soon as I return.” He went to the
door and smiled back at her. It hurt his face. “Thanks.”

Miss Thomas opened her mouth to speak, but did not. She raised her right
hand in a sort of salute and turned around to put the files away.

The doctor called from a booth near the Newell apartment. “Did I wake
you, Osa? I’m sorry. Sometimes I don’t know how late it gets.”

“Who … Fred? Is that you, Fred?”

“Are you up to some painful conversation?”

Alarmed, she cried, “Is something the matter? Is Dick—”

He mentally kicked himself for his clumsiness. What other interpretation
could she have put on such a remark? “He’s okay. I’m sorry. I guess I’m
not good at the light banter … Can I see you?”

She paused for a long moment. He could hear her breathing. “I’ll come
out. Where are you?”

He told her.

She said, “There’s a café just around the corner, to your left. Give me
ten minutes.”

He put up the phone and went to the corner. It was on a dingy street
which seemed to be in hiding. On the street, the café hid. Inside the
café, booths hid. In one of the booths, the doctor sat and was hidden.
It was all he could do to keep himself from assuming a fetal posture.

A waiter came. He ordered collinses, made with light rum. He slumped
then, with his forearms on the table and his chin on them, and watched
bubbles rise in the drinks and collect on the underside of the shaved
ice, until the glasses frosted too much for him to see. Then he closed
his eyes and attempted to suspend thought, but he heard her footsteps
and sprang up.

“Here I am,” he said in a seal-like bark far louder than he had
intended.

She sat opposite him. “Rum collins,” she said, and only then did he
remember that it had always been the drink they shared, when they had
shared things. He demanded of himself, Now why did I have to do that?
and answered, You know perfectly well why.

“Is he really all right?” she asked him.

“Yes, Osa. So far.”

“I’m sorry.” She turned her glass around, but did not lift it. “I mean
maybe you don’t want to talk about Dick.”

“You’re very thoughtful,” he said, and wondered why it had never
occurred to him to see her just for himself. “But you’re wrong. I did
want to talk about him.”

“Well … if you like, Fred. What, especially?”

He laughed. “I don’t know. Isn’t this silly?”

He sipped his drink. He was aware that she did the same. They never used
to say “cheers” or “skoal” or anything else, but they always took that
first sip together.

He said, “I need something that segmentation of hypnosis or
narcosynthesis just won’t give me. I need to flesh out a skeleton. No,
it’s more refined than that. I need tints for a charcoal portrait.” He
lifted his hands and put them down again. “I don’t know what I need.
I’ll tell you when I get it.”

“Well, of course I’ll help if I can,” she said uncertainly.

“All right. Just talk, then. Try to forget who I am.”

He met her eyes and the question there, and elaborated, “Forget I’m his
therapist, Osa. I’m an interested stranger who has never seen him, and
you’re telling me ’bout him.”

“Engineering degree, and where he comes from, and how many sisters?”

“No,” he said, “but keep that up. You’re bound to stumble across what I
want that way.”

“Well, he’s … he’s been sick. I think I’d tell a stranger that.”

“Good! What do you mean sick?”

_She glanced quickly at him and he could follow the thought behind it:
Why don’t you tell ME how sick he is? And then, But you really want to
play this game of the interested stranger. All right_.

She stopped looking at him and said, “Sick. He can’t be steered by
anything but his own—pressures and they—they aren’t the pressures he
should have. Not for this world.”

“Why do you suppose that is?”

“He just doesn’t seem to care. No,” she denied forcefully, “I don’t mean
that, not at all. It’s more like—I think he would care if he—if he was
allowed to, and he isn’t allowed to.” She got his eyes again. “This is
very hard to do, Fred.”

“I know and I’m sorry. But do go on; you’re doing fine. What do you
mean, he isn’t allowed to care about the world and the way it wags? Who
won’t allow him?”

“It isn’t a who; it’s a—I don’t know. You’d have a term for it. I’d call
it a monster on his back, something that drives him to do things, be
something he really isn’t.”

“We strangers don’t have any terms for anything,” he reminded her
gently.

“That’s a little refreshing,” she said with a wan half-smile. “I
like … mystified … people. They make me feel like one of the crowd. You
know who’s lucky?” she asked, her voice suddenly wild and strained and,
by its tone, changing the subject. “Psychotics are lucky. The nuts, the
real buggy ones. (I talk like this to layman strangers.) The ones who
see butterflies all the time, the ones who think the president is after
them.”

“Lucky!” he exploded.

“Yes, lucky. They have a name for the beast that’s chewing on them.
Sometimes they can see it themselves.”

“I don’t quite—”

“I mean this,” she said excitedly. “If I see grizzly bears under every
lamp post, I’m _seeing_ something. It has a name, a shape; I could draw
a picture of it. If I do something irrational, the way some psychos
do—run a nonexistent railroad or shoot invisible pheasant with an
invisible gun, I’m _doing_ something. I can describe it and say how it
feels and write letters about it. See, these are all _things_ plaguing
the insane. Labels, handles. Things that _you_ can hold up to reality to
demonstrate that they don’t coincide with it.”

“And that’s lucky?”

She nodded miserably. “A mere neurotic—Dick, for example—hasn’t a thing
he can name. He acts in ways we call irrational, and has a sense of
values nobody can understand, and does things in a way that seems
consistent to him but not to anyone else. It’s as if there were a
grizzly bear, after all, but we’d never heard of grizzly bears—what they
are, what they want, how they act. He’s driven by some monster without a
name, something that no one can see and that even he is not aware of.
That’s what I mean.”

“Ah.”

They sat for minutes, silent and careful.

Then, “Osa—”

“Yes, Fred.”

“Why do you love him?”

She looked up at him. “You really meant it when you said this would be a
painful conversation.”

“Never mind that. Just tell me.”

“I don’t think it’s a thing you can tell.”

“Then try this: What is it you love in him?”

She made a helpless gesture. “Him.”

He sat without responding until he knew she felt his dissatisfaction
with the answer.

She frowned and then closed her eyes. “I couldn’t make you understand,
Fred. To understand you’d have to be two things: a woman, and—Osa.”
Still he sat silent. Twice she looked up to his face and away, and at
last yielded.

She said in a low voice, “It’s a … tenderness you wouldn’t believe, no
matter how well you know him. It’s a gentle, loving something that no
one ever born ever had before and never will again. It’s … I hate this,
Fred!”

“Go on, for heaven’s sake! This is exactly what I’m looking for.”

“It is? Well, then … But I hate talking like this to you. It doesn’t
seem right.”

“Go on!”

She said, almost in a whisper, “Life is plain hell sometimes. He’s gone
and I don’t know where, and he comes back and it’s just awful. Sometimes
he acts as if he were alone in the place—he doesn’t see me, doesn’t
answer. Or maybe he’ll be the other way, after me every second, teasing
and prodding and twisting every word until I don’t know what I said or
what I should say next, or who I am, or … anything, and he won’t leave
me alone, not to eat or to sleep or to go out. And then he—”

She stopped and the doctor waited, and this time realized that waiting
would not be enough. “Don’t stop,” he said.

She shook her head.

“Please. It’s impor—”

“I would, Fred,” she burst out frantically. “I’m not refusing to. I
can’t, that’s all. The words won’t—”

“Don’t try to tell me what it is, then,” he suggested. “Just say what
happens and how it makes you feel. You can do that.”

“I suppose so,” she said, after considering it.

Osa took a deep breath, almost a sigh, and closed her eyes again.

“It will be hell,” she said, “and then I’ll look at him and he … and
he … well, it’s _there_, that’s all. Not a word, not a sign sometimes,
but the room is full of it. It’s … it’s something to love, yes, it’s
that, but nobody can just love something, one-way, forever. So it’s a
loving thing, too, from him to me. It suddenly arrives and everything
else he is doing, the cruelty, the ignoring, whatever might be happening
just then, it all stops and there’s nothing else but the—whatever it
is.”

She wet her lips. “It can happen any time; there’s never a sign or a
warning. It can happen now, and again a minute from now, or not for
months. It can last most of a day or flash by like a bird. Sometimes he
goes on talking to me while it happens; sometimes what he actually says
is just nothing, small talk. Sometimes he just stands looking at me,
without saying anything. Sometimes he—I’m sorry, Fred—he makes love to
me then and that’s … Oh, dear God, that’s …”

“Here’s my handkerchief.”

“Thank you. He—does that other times, too, when there’s nothing loving
about it. This—this thing-to-love, it—it seems to have nothing to do
with anything else, no pattern. It happens and it’s what I wait for and
what I look back on; it’s all I have and all I want.”

When he was quite sure she had no more to say, he hazarded, “It’s as if
some other—some other personality suddenly took over.”

He was quite unprepared for her reaction. She literally shouted, _“No!”_
and was startled herself.

She recoiled and glanced guiltily around the café. “I don’t know why,”
she said, sounding frightened, “but that was just—just _awful_, what you
just said. Fred, if you can give any slightest credence to the idea of
feminine intuition, you’ll get that idea right out of your head. I
couldn’t begin to tell you why, but it just isn’t so. What loves me that
way may be part of Dick; but it’s Dick, not anybody or anything else. I
_know_ that’s so, that’s all. I know it.”

Her gaze was so intense that it all but made him wince. He could see her
trying and trying to find words, rejecting and trying again.

At last, “The only way I can say it that makes any sense to me is that
Dick couldn’t be such a—a louse so much of the time and still walk a
straight line without something just as extreme in the other direction.
It’s—it’s a great pity for the rest of the world that he only shows that
side to me, but there it is.”

“Does he show it only to you?” He touched her hand and released it. “I’m
sorry, but I must ask that.”

She smiled and a kind of pride shone from her face. “Only to me. I
suppose that’s intuition again, but it’s as certain as Sunday.” The
pride disappeared and was replaced by patient agony. “I don’t delude
myself, Fred—he has other women; plenty of them. But that particular
something is for me. It isn’t something I wonder about. I just—know.”

He sat back wearily.

She asked, “Is all this what you wanted?”

He gave her a quick, hurt glance and saw, to his horror, her eyes
filling with tears.

“It’s what I asked for,” he said in a flat voice.

“I see the difference.” She used his handkerchief. “May I have this?”

“You can have—” But he stopped himself. “Sure.” He got up. “No,” he
said, and took the damp handkerchief out of her hand. “I’ll have
something better for you.”

“Fred,” she said distressed, “I—”

“I’m going, forgive me and all that,” he said, far more angrily than he
had thought he would. But polite talk and farewells were much more than
he could stand. “The layman stranger has to have a long interview with a
professional acquaintance. I don’t think I’d better see you again, Osa.”

“All right, Fred,” she said to his back.

He had hurt her, he knew, but he knew also that his stature in her
cosmos could overshadow the hurt and a hundred more like it. He
luxuriated in the privilege and stamped out, throwing a bill to the
waiter on the way.

He drove back and plodded up the ramp to the clinic. For some obscure
reason, the inscription over the door caught his attention. He had
passed it hundreds of times without a glance; he had ordered it put
there and he was satisfied with it, and why should it matter now? But it
did. What was it that Newell had said about it? _Some saw about the
sanctity of personality_. A very perceptive remark, thought the doctor,
considering that Newell hadn’t read it:

ONLY MAN CAN FATHOM MAN

It was from Robert Lindner and was the doctor’s answer to the inevitable
charges of “push-button therapy.” But he wondered now if the word “Man”
was really inclusive enough.

He shook the conjecture and let himself into the building.

Light gleamed from the translucent door of his office at the far end of
the corridor. He walked down the slick flooring toward it, listening to
his heels and not thinking otherwise, his mind as purposively relaxed as
a fighter’s body between rounds. He opened the door.

“What are you doing?”

“Waiting,” said Miss Thomas.

“Why?”

“Just in case.”

Without answering, he went to the closet and hung up his coat. Back at
his desk, he sat down and straightened his tired spine until it
crackled. She put her feet under her and he understood that she was
ready to leave if he wished her to.

He said, “Hypothesis: Newell and Anson are discrete personalities.”

While he spoke, he noticed Miss Thomas’s feet move outward a little and
then cross at the ankles. His inner thought was, Of all the things I
like about this woman, the best is the amount of conversation I have
with her without talking.

“And we have plenty of data to back that up,” he continued. “The EEGs
alone prove it. Anson is Anson and Newell is Newell, and to prove it,
we’ve crystallized them for anyone else to see. We’ve done such a job on
them that we know exactly what Anson is like without Newell. We’ve built
him up that way, with that in mind. We haven’t done quite the same with
Newell, but we might as well have. I mean we’ve investigated Newell as
if Anson did not exist within him. What it amounts to is this: In order
to demonstrate a specimen of multiple personality, we’ve separated and
isolated the components.

“Then we go into a flat spin because neither segment looks like a real
human being … Miss Thomas?”

“Yes?”

“Do you mind the way I keep on saying ‘we’?”

She smiled and shook her head. “Not at the moment.”

“Further,” he said, answering her smile but relentlessly pursuing his
summation, “we’ve taken our two personalities and treated each like a
potentially salvable patient—one neurotic, one retarded. We’ve operated
under the assumption that each contained his own disorder and could be
treated by separate therapies.”

“We’ve been wrong?”

“I certainly have,” said the doctor. He slapped the file cabinet at his
left. “In here, there’s a very interesting paper by one Weisbaden, who
theorizes that multiple personalities are actually twins, identical
twins born of the same egg-cell and developing within one body. One
step, as it were, into the microcosm from _foetus in foetu_.”

“I’ve read about that,” said Miss Thomas. “One twin born enclosed in the
body of another.”

“But not just partly—altogether enclosed. Whether or not Weisbaden’s
right, it’s worth using as a test hypothesis. That’s what I’ve been
doing, among other things, and I’ve had my nose stuck so far into it
that I wasn’t able to see a very important corresponding part of the
analogy: namely, that twinning itself is an anomaly, and any deviation
in a sibling of multiple origin is teratological.”

“My,” said Miss Thomas in mock admiration.

The doctor smiled. “I should have said, ‘monstrous,’ but why drag in
superstitions? This thing is bad enough already. Anyway, if we’re to
carry our twinning idea as an analogy, we have got to include the very
likely possibility that our multiple personalities are as abnormal as
Siamese twins or any other monstrosity—I _hate_ to use that word!”

“I’m not horrified,” said Miss Thomas. “Abnormal in what way?”

“Well, in the crudest possible terms, what would you say was the
abnormality suffered by one Siamese twin?”

“The other Siamese twin.”

“Mmm. And by the same analogy, what’s the name of Newell’s disorder?”

“My goodness!” gasped Miss Thomas. “We better not tell Hildy Jarrell.”

“That isn’t the only thing we’ll have to keep from her—for a while, at
least,” said the doctor. “Listen: did you run my notes on Newell?”

“All of them.”

“You remember the remark she made that bothered me, about Anson’s being
only and altogether good, and the trouble I had with the implication
that Newell was only and altogether bad?”

“I remember it.”

“It’s a piece of childishness that annoys me whenever I find it and I
was damned annoyed to be thinking at all along those lines. The one
reason for its being in the notes at all is that I had to decant it
somewhere. Well, I’ve been euchred, Miss Thomas. Because Anson appeared
in our midst shining and unsullied, I’ve leaned over backward trying to
keep away from him the corruptions of anger, fear, greed, concupiscence
and all the other hobbies of real mankind. By the same token, it never
occurred to me to analyze what kindness, generosity, sympathy or empathy
might be lurking in Newell. Why bother in such a—what was the term you
used?”

“Heel,” said Miss Thomas without hesitation.

“Heel. So what we have to do first is to give each of these—uh—people
the privilege of entirety. If they are monsters, then let us at least
permit them to be whole monsters.”

“You don’t mean you’ll—”

“We,” he corrected, smiling.

She said, through her answering smile, “You don’t mean we’ll take poor
Anson and—”

He nodded.

“Offhand, I don’t see how you’re going to do it, Doctor. Anson has no
fear. He’d laugh as he walked into a lion’s cage or a high-tension line.
And I can’t imagine how you’d make him angry. You of all people. He—he
loves you. As for … oh, dear. This is awful.”

“Extremes are awful,” he agreed. “We’ll have to get pretty basic, but we
can do it. Hence, I suggest Miss Jarrell be sent to Kalamazoo for a new
stove or some such.”

“And then what?”

“It is standard practice to acquaint a patient with the name and nature
of his disorder. In our field, we don’t tell him, we show him, and when
he absorbs the information we call it insight. Anson, meet Newell.
Newell, meet Anson.”

“I do hope they’ll be friends,” said Miss Thomas unhappily.

In a darkness within a darkness in the dark, Anson slept his new kind of
sleep, wherein now he had dreams. And then there was his own music, the
deep sound which lit the darkness and pierced the dark envelopes, one
within the other; and now he could emerge to the light and laughter and
the heady mysteries of life and communication with Miss Hildy and Doctor
Fred, and the wonder on wonder of perception. Gladly he flung himself
back to life to—

But this wasn’t the same. He was here, in the bed, but it wasn’t the
same at all. There was no rim of light around the ceiling, no bars of
gold pouring in a sunlit window; this was the same, but not the same—it
was dark. He blinked his eyes so hard, he made little colored lights,
but they were inside his eyes and did not count.

There was noise, unheard-of, unbearable noise in the form of a
cymbal-crash right by his head in the dark. He recoiled from it and
tried to bounce up and run, and found he could not move. His arms were
bound to his sides, his legs to the bed, by some wide formless something
which held him trapped. He fought against it, crying, and then the bed
dropped away underneath him and stopped with a crash, and rose and
dropped again. There was another noise—not a noise, though it struck at
him like one: this was a photoflash, though he could not know it.

Blinded and sick, he lay in terror, waiting for terror again.

He heard a voice say softly, “Turn down the gain,” and his music, his
note, the pervasive background to all his consciousness, began to
weaken. He strained toward it and it receded from him. Thumpings and
shufflings from somewhere in the dark threatened to hide it away from
him altogether. He felt, without words, that the note was his life and
that he was losing it. For the first time in his conscious life, he
became consciously afraid of dying.

He screamed, and screamed again, and then there was a blackness blacker
than the dark and it all ceased.

“He’s fainted. Lights, please. Turn off that note. Give him 550 and
we’ll see if he can sleep normally. God, I hope we didn’t go too far.”

They stood watching the patient. They were panting with tension.

“Help me with this,” said the doctor. Together, he and Miss Thomas
unbuckled the restraining sheet. They cleared away the flashgun, the
cymbals, and readjusted the bed-raising control to its normal slow
operation.

“He’s all right, physically anyway,” said the doctor after a swift
examination. “I told you it would work if we got basic enough. He
wouldn’t fear a lion because he doesn’t know what a lion is. But
restraint and sudden noise and falling—he doesn’t have to know what they
are. Okay, button him up again.”

“What? You’re not going to—”

“Come on, button him up,” he said brusquely.

She frowned, but she helped him replace the restraining sheet. “I still
think—” she began, and earned a “Sh!”

He set up the 200-cycle note again at its usual amplitude and they
waited. There was a lag in apparent consciousness this time. The doctor
realized that the patient was awake, but apparently afraid to open his
eyes.

“Anson …”

Anson began to cry weakly.

“What’s the matter, Anson?”

“D-doctor Fred, Doctor Fred … the big noise, and then I couldn’t move
and all the black and white smash lights.” He wept again.

“Doctor Fred!” he cried in panic.

Still the doctor said nothing.

Anson rolled his head wildly, fell back, tried again. “Make it so I can
get up,” Anson called piteously.

“No,” said the doctor flatly.

“Make so I—”

“No.”

Piercingly, Anson shrieked. He surged upward so powerfully that for a
second the doctor was afraid for the fastenings on the restraining
sheet. But they held.

For nearly ten minutes, Anson fought the sheet, screaming and drooling.
Fright turned to fury to an intense, witless battle. It was a childish
tantrum magnified by the strength and staying power of an adult.

At about the second minute, the doctor keyed in a supplementary
frequency, a shrill 10,500 cycles which had been blank on the index.
Whenever Anson paused for breath, the doctor intoned, “You are angry.
You are angry.” Grimly he watched until, a matter of seconds before the
patient had to break, he released him to sleep.

“I couldn’t stand another minute of that,” said Miss Thomas. Her lips
were almost gray. She moistened a towel and gently bathed the sleeping
face. “I didn’t like that at all.”

“You’ll like the rest of it,” promised the doctor. “Let’s get rid of
this sheet.”

They took it off and stored it.

“How’d you like me to hit the ten-five cycles with that sheet off?” he
asked.

“Build him a cage first,” she breathed in an awed tone.

He grinned suddenly. “Hit eighty cycles for me, will you?”

She did and they watched Richard Newell wakening. He groaned and moved
his head gingerly. He sat up suddenly and yelped, and covered his face
for a moment with both hands.

“Hello, Newell, how do you feel?”

“Like the output of a garbage disposal unit. I haven’t felt like this
since the day I rowed a boat for fourteen hours.”

“It’s all right, Newell. All in a day’s work.”

“Work is right. I know—you’ve had me out pulling a plow while I was
hypnotized. Slave labor. Lowers the overhead. Damn it, Fred, I’m not
going to take much more of this.”

“You’ll take as much as I choose to give you,” snapped the doctor. “This
is my party now, Dicky boy.”

Miss Thomas gasped. Newell slowly swung his legs out and sat looking at
the doctor, an ominous and ugly half-smile on his face.

“Miss Thomas,” said the doctor, “ten-five, please.”

With his amusement deeply concealed, he watched Miss Thomas sidle to the
controls and dial for the 10,500 supplementary note. He knew exactly
what was going on in her mind. Ten-five was a fury motif, the command to
Anson to relive the state of unbearable anger he had been in just
moments ago.

“Miss Thomas,” said Newell silkily, “did I ever tell you the story of my
life? Or, for that matter, the story of the doctor’s life?”

“Why—no, Mr. Newell.”

“Once upon a time,” said Newell, “there was a doctor who … who …” As the
shrill note added itself to the bumble of the 80-cycle tone, Newell’s
voice faltered. Behind him, the doctor heard the rustle of Miss Thomas’s
starch as she braced herself.

Newell looked at the doctor with astonishment. “What the hell am I up
to?” he murmured. “That isn’t a funny story. ’Scuse me, Miss Thomas.” He
visibly relaxed, swung his feet back up on the bed and rested on one
elbow. “I haven’t felt like this since … where’s Osa?” he asked.

“Home. Waiting for you.”

“God. Hope she doesn’t have to wait much longer. Is she all right?”

“She’s fine. So are you, pretty near. I think we have the thing whipped.
Like to hear about it?”

“ ‘Talk about me,’ ” Newell quoted. “ ‘Talk nice if you can, but talk
about me.’ ”

The doctor saw Miss Thomas staring incredulously at the controls,
checking to be sure she had keyed the right note. He laughed. Newell
laughed with him; it was one of the most pleasant of imaginable sounds.
And it wasn’t Anson’s laugh, either—not even remotely. This was Richard
Newell to the life, but warm, responsive, considerate.

The doctor said, “Did Osa ever tell you she thought you had a nameless
monster pushing you around?”

“Only a couple hundred times.”

“Well, you have. I’m not joking, Dick—you really have. Only you’ve never
suspected it and you don’t have a name to call it by.”

“I don’t get you.” He was curious, anxious to learn, to like and be
liked. It was in the way he spoke, moved, listened. Miss Thomas stood
with her hand frozen near the controls, ready to shut him off at the
first sign of expected violence.

“You will. Now here’s the picture.” And in simple terms, the doctor told
him the story of Anson, the theory of multiple personality as a
phenomenon of twinning, and at last his theory of the acrobatic
stabilization the two entities had achieved on their own.

“Why acrobatic?” asked Newell.

“You know you act like a heel most of the time, Dick.”

“You might say so.” It was said quite without resentment.

“Here’s why. (Just listen, now; you can test it any way you like after
you’ve heard it all.) Your alter ego (to coin a phrase) had been walled
in, excluded from consciousness and expression and even self-awareness,
ever since you were born. I won’t attempt to explain that; I don’t know
how. Anyway, there it lay, isolated but alive, Dick, _alive—and just as
strong as you!_”

“I … can’t picture such a thing.”

“It isn’t easy. I can’t either, completely. It’s like trying to get into
the mind of another species, or a plant, if you can imagine such a
thing. I do know, though, that the thing is alive, and up until recently
had nothing—no knowledge, no retained experience, no mode of expression
at all.”

“How do you know it’s there, then?”

“It’s there all right,” said the doctor. “And right this very minute,
it’s blowing its top. You see, all your life it’s lived with you. It has
had a blind, constant urge to break through, and it never could make it
until it popped up here and we drew it out. It’s a fascinating entity,
Dick. I won’t go into that now; you’ll know it—him—thoroughly before you
leave. But believe it or not, it’s pretty nice. More than nice: it’s
positively angelic. It’s lain there in the dark all these years like a
germinated seed, pushing up toward the light. And every time it came
near—you battled it down again.”

“I did?”

“For good sound survival reasons, you did. But like a lot of survival
impulses yours were pretty irrational. A lion roars, a deer runs. Good
survival. But if he runs off a cliff? What I’m getting at is that
there’s room for both of you in Richard Anson Newell. You’ve coexisted
fairly well, considering, as strangers and sometimes enemies. You’re
going to do a lot better as friends and partners. Brothers, if you want
the true term, because that’s what the two of you are.”

“How does this—if true—explain the way I’ve been mucking around with my
life?”

Looking for an image, the doctor paused. “You might say you’ve been
cantilevered out from a common center. Way out. Now your alter—we call
him Anson—is, as I’ve said, a very nice fellow. His blind strugglings
have been almost all toward something—call it an aura, if you like—in
people around you. The pressures are everything that’s warm and lovable
and good to be with.

“But you—man, you felt invaded! You could never reach out toward
anything; Anson was there ahead of you, pressing and groping. You had to
react, immediately and with all your might, _in the opposite direction_.
Isn’t it true that all your life you’ve rejected and tramped on anything
that attracted you—and at the same time you’ve taken only things you
couldn’t really care about?”

“Well, I …”

“Just hold onto the idea. This speech I’m making is for your
intellectual understanding; I don’t expect you to buy it first crack out
of the barrel.”

“But I haven’t always … I mean what about Osa? Are you telling me I
didn’t really want Osa?”

“That’s the cantilever effect, Dick. Anson never felt about Osa the way
you did. I think she must have some confining effect on him; he doesn’t
like to be confined, does he, Miss Thomas?” He chuckled. “She either
leaves him cold or makes him angry. So angry that it’s beyond belief.
But it’s an infant’s anger, Dick—blind and furious and extreme. And what
happens _then_, when you react in the _opposite_ direction?”

“Oh, my God,” breathed Newell. “Osa …” He turned his suddenly
illuminated gaze up. “You know, sometimes I—we—it’s like a big light
that …”

“I know, I know,” said the doctor testily. “Matter of fact, that’s
happening right now. Turn off the ten-five, please, Miss Thomas.”

“Yes, doctor.”

“That high note,” the doctor explained. “It’s for Anson—induced anger.
You’re being pretty decent at the moment, Newell. You realize that?”

“Well, why wouldn’t I? You’ve done a lot for me.”

The note faded. Newell closed his eyes and opened them again. There was
a long, tense silence.

Finally Newell said in his most softly insulting tone, “You spin a
pretty tale, Freddy boy. But I’m tired of listening. Shall I blackmail
you the hell out of here?”

“Five-fifty, Miss Thomas.”

“Yes, doctor.” She turned Newell off.

Back in the office again, Miss Thomas jittered in indecision. She tried
to speak and then looked at the doctor with mute pleading.

“Go ahead,” he encouraged.

She shook her head. “I don’t know what comes next. Morton Prince was
wrong; there are no multiple egos, just multiple siblings sharing the
same body, the same brain.” She halted, waiting for him to take it from
there.

“Well?” he said.

“I know you’re not going to sacrifice one for the other; that’s why you
never handled these cases before. But—” she flapped her hands
helplessly—“even if Newell could carry the equipment around, I’d never
sleep nights thinking that Anson had to go through the agony of that
ten-five note just so Newell would be a decent human being. Or even, for
that matter, vice versa.”

“It wouldn’t be either human or practical,” he said. “Well?”

“Do they take turns being dominant, one day on, one day off?”

“That still would be sacrificing each half the time.”

“Then what? You said it would be ‘Newell, meet Anson. Anson meet
Newell.’ But you don’t have the same problem you’d have with Siamese
twins or the same solution.”

“Which is?”

“Separating them without killing either one. All these two have is a
single brain to share and a single body. If you could cut them free—”

“I can’t,” he said bluntly. “I don’t intend to.”

“All right,” she conceded in defeat. “You’re the doctor. You tell me.”

“Just what you said—the Morton Prince cases were in communication.”

“And Newell and Anson are, just because we gave Anson a vocabulary? What
about that cantilever effect you explained to Newell? You can’t let them
go through life counterbalancing each other—Newell pulling violently to
the other side of Anson’s reactions, Anson doing the same with Newell’s.
Then _what?_” she repeated almost angrily. “If you know, why put me
through this guessing game?”

“To see if you’d come up with the same answer,” he said candidly. “A
check on my judgment. Do you mind?”

She shook her head again, but this time with a little complimentary
smile. “It’s a painful way to get cooperation, only it works, damn you.”
She frowned then, considering. “The two of them are compartmented. Are
they different in that way from the other multiples?”

“Some, yes—the ones that are detected because there is communication.
But not the others. And those cases rate treatment (because all people
in difficulty do) and Newell-Anson, if we work it out properly, will
show us how to help them. There’s an obvious answer, Miss Thomas. I’m
hoping—almost desperately—that you come up with the one I thought of.”

She made a self-impatient gesture. “_Not_ the psychostat. _Definitely_
not eliminating one or the other. _Not_ making them take turns.” She
looked up with a questioning awe on her face. “The _opposite_ of
treating Siamese twins?”

“Like what?” he asked urgently, leaning forward.

“Don’t separate them. _Join_ them. Make a juncture.”

“Keep going,” he pressed. “Don’t stop now.”

“Surgical?”

“Can’t be done. It isn’t one lobe for Newell, the other for Anson, or
anything that simple. What else?”

She thought deeply, began several times to say something, dismissed each
intended suggestion with a curt headshake. He waited with equally deep
intensity.

She nodded at last. “Modulate them separately.” She was no longer
asking. “Then modulate them in relation to each other so they won’t be
in that awful cantilever balancing act.”

“Say it!” he nearly yelled.

“But that isn’t enough.”

“No!”

“Audio response.”

“Why?” he rapped out. “And which?”

“Sixty cycles—the AC tone they’ll be hearing almost all the time. Assign
it to communication between them.”

The doctor slumped into a chair, drained of tension. He nodded at her,
with the tiredest grin she had ever seen.

“All of it,” he whispered. “You got everything I thought of … including
the 60 cycles. I knew I was right. Now I _know_ it. Or doesn’t that make
sense?”

“Of course it does.”

“Then let’s get started.”

“Now?” she asked, astonished. “You’re too tired—”

“Am I?” He jacked himself out of the chair. “Try stopping me and see.”

They used the EEG resultants, made two analogs and another, and used all
three as the optimum standard for the final fixing process in the
psychostat. It was a longer, more meticulous process than it had ever
been and it worked; and what shook the doctor’s hand that last day was
an unbelievable blend—all of Newell’s smoothness and a new strength, the
sum of powers he had previously exhausted in the dual struggle that
neither had known of; and, with it, Anson’s bright fascination with the
very act of drawing breath, seeing colors, finding wonderment in
everything.

“We’re nice guys,” said Richard Anson Newell, still shaking the doctor’s
hand. “We’ll get along great.”

“I don’t doubt it a bit,” the doctor said. “Give my best to Osa. Tell
her … here’s something a little better than a wet handkerchief.”

“Whatever you say,” said Richard Anson Newell.

He waved to Miss Thomas, who watched from the corridor, and behind her,
Hildy Jarrell, who wept, and he went down the steps to the street.

“We’re making a mistake, doctor,” said Miss Thomas, “letting
him—them—go.”

“Why?” he asked, curious.

“All that brain power packed in one skull …”

The doctor wanted to laugh. He didn’t. “You’d think so, wouldn’t you?”
he agreed.

“Meaning it’s not so at all,” she said suspiciously. “Why not?”

“Because it isn’t _twice_ the amount of brains any individual has. It’s
only as much as any _two_ distinct individuals have. Like you and me,
for instance. Mostly we supplement each other—but just here and there,
not everywhere, adding up to a giant double brain. Same with Newell and
Anson. And any two people can be counted on to jam one another
occasionally. So will they—but not like before treatment.”

They watched until Richard Anson Newell was out of sight, then walked
back to check the multiple personality cases that Miss Jarrell had dug
out of the files.

Four months later, the doctor got a letter:

_Dear Fred_,

_I’ll write this because it will do me good to get it off my chest. If
it doesn’t do enough good, I’ll send it. If that doesn’t help, I don’t
know what I’ll do. Yes, I do. Nothing_.

_Dick is … incredible. He takes care of me, Fred, in ways I’d never
dreamed of or hoped for. He cares. That’s it, he cares—about me, about
his work. He learns new things all the time and loves old things over
again. It’s … could I say a miracle?_

_But, Fred—this is hateful of me, I know—the thing I told you about, the
thing I used to wish for and live to remember, no matter what … it’s
gone. That’s probably good, because of what happened between times_.

_But sometimes I’d trade my perfect husband for that louse and a wet
handkerchief, if I could have the other thing along with it somehow_.

_There, I’ve said it_.

_Osa_

The doctor galloped through the clinic until he found his head
technician in the electrical lab.

“Tommie,” he said jovially, “did you ever go out and get drunk with a
doctor?”

The tears were streaming down his face. Miss Thomas went out and got
drunk with the doctor.



THE WAITING THING INSIDE


DELIA FOX STOOD IN THE CENTER of the saddle shed, her face pale, her
thin lips sucked in and bitten on, invisible. The Circle F’s steady
rider, Vic Ryan, squatted on his tall heels with his back to the wall
and laughed at her. “All right, all right—I’ll raid, I’ll gun out your
nester.” He laughed again. “But under orders.” He aimed the stem of his
pipe at her. “The boss’s orders.”

“You know he’ll never!”

“If I raid, he will,” said Ryan easily. “And he’ll give me those orders
right up to and includin’ the minute I kick in that nester’s shack
door.”

“You mean you want him to go with you?”

“That’s about it.”

“That’s the same thing as saying you won’t go.”

Ryan shrugged and began to pack his pipe. “I reckon hell _could_ freeze
over.”

She stamped to the door. “Catch a lot of folks with some heavy hauling
to do, the day it does,” she snapped, and went out.

Ryan took the pipe from his mouth and laughed again. He was not a jovial
man and his laughter was ugly; but it suited his mood.

Through the open door he could see across the yard—see Delia Fox,
stiff-backed, furious, as she stamped into the house. She was
thirty-eight years old, with a face five years older and a body twenty
years younger, and time was when Vic Ryan used to look at that figure
with something besides the familiarity of contempt. He peered back over
the years at himself, and her, and he wondered vaguely who those people
were—the rawboned young cowboy who’d asked her to marry him, and the
girl with ice in her eyes who had told him to own more than an old
saddle and an iron skillet before he suggested such a thing to his
betters. A long time ago … and never heard a word he had spoken to her
since that wasn’t strictly business. Yet he’d stayed, year in and year
out, holding the Circle F together against all comers—against the
weather, against lazy cowhands they had to put up with at the rates the
Circle F paid, against drought, landslide, botflies, and even Delia’s
brother Roy.

At the thought of Roy he spat. Roy was younger than Delia, and that and
his flabbiness were what had led Vic so far astray in the early days:
Who could have guessed that it was Roy’s ranch—lock, stock, and chopping
block? It had been Delia who handled the money, made the decisions,
hired and fired. “Better see to the south waterhole today, Vic,” Delia
would say, and Roy would chime in, “Yeah, Vic, go clean out the
waterhole.” Always her order, her brother’s echo. So marry into it; you
can’t do nothing to the boss’s relatives, but a no-good brother-in-law
rates a boot in the tail right after the honeymoon. So Vic Ryan had
tried it, and she had spat in his eye—Delia Fox, queen of the range, the
bitch.

And a year afterward he’d fallen over Roy Fox on the town trail,
belly-down and puking drunk, but bragging for all that. Vic had brought
him home and slung him into bed, but not before Roy had dragged him into
the parlor and showed him the will by which Roy Fox’s father, the old
fool, had made Roy sole heir to the Circle F.

Something had happened to Vic Ryan that night, something so deep that he
couldn’t name it if he wanted to. It had to do with a woman who’d
refused him because he had so little, when all the time she had nothing;
it had to do with a pig-eyed jelly-belly who’d order a better man to do
jobs he wouldn’t do himself, any time his sister wanted something done.
Whatever it was, it made Vic Ryan stay, not planning—because the thing
was planned; not building—because it was built … just waiting.

A long wait.

And a longer one yet, he chuckled, before she gets Roy Fox to ride out
with me to raid that nester. The nester had squatted in the narrow
eastern end of the valley. There was bottomland there, dark and fertile,
and good water. Circle F stock had winter-grazed there for years,
although legally it wasn’t Circle F land. The nester, a heavyset,
towheaded stranger with a spavined wife and a rickety kid, hadn’t sent
any announcements around or even come calling; one fine day, there he
was, with a dirty sod house and a plow and a team of oxen. Delia Fox
wanted the nester out of “our” valley, boundary or no, and even if he
was a full day’s ride away. Vic Ryan wanted him out too, for somewhat
less emotional reasons: he knew a successful squatter would bring
another, and then fifty more, and goodbye free range. He took the
trouble to ride into town and find out quietly if the nester had filed
any sort of claim, and came back with the news that the nester had
not—too busy, too lazy, or too ignorant; it didn’t matter.

But Roy—Roy had shrugged when he heard about the nester, changed the
subject when he heard about the claim (or lack of it), and when Delia
started getting waspish about it, he started drinking. Vic Ryan
understood. He knew it was only a matter of time before Delia would lay
her ears back and _make_ Roy do something about the nester, and the idea
of facing up to a stranger was more than Roy could handle. One day he
came into the bunkhouse, mottle-faced, red-eyed, and sat down on Vic’s
bunk. He started to call Vic a chummy “old boy” and Vic told him to get
the hell off his clean blanket-roll and say what he had come to say. Roy
said, “Sure, sure, boss,” soothingly, and got up and stood weaving in
the doorway, and suggested that Vic ride over to the east pass and see
if some Circle F stock hadn’t strayed up there, and on the way maybe
warn off that nester, huh?

Vic told him to go do his own dirty work, whereupon Roy got up on his
drunken dignity and said, “Damn it, Ryan, I can run things around here
without you, you know.”

Vic laughed in his face and told him yeah, but his sister couldn’t.

But Roy had gone, all the same, and so had Vic Ryan. For at daybreak
that next morning an infuriated Delia Fox had saddled up and galloped
east, and a shaken and deflated Roy had crept into the bunkhouse to beg
Vic Ryan to follow and stop her. For a long moment Vic stared at the
quivering rancher and thought it over, and what tipped the scales he
never knew, but he snatched up the fire-bucket, doused Roy Fox, and
snarled at him to come on. They saddled up and got their guns and rode,
and it wasn’t until afternoon that they caught up with Delia. She had
nothing to say to them at all, but kept on riding east, and they
followed.

When they crested the rise and saw, down by the cliffs, the sod shack,
Roy suddenly spurred up beside his sister and said, “You really got
nothing to say to that man, Dele. We’re off our land.” He was chalky and
shaking. Delia said coldly, “You’re the one to say it. If you can’t find
the words in your head, get ’em out of this”—and she handed him a bottle
of whiskey from her saddlebag.

Vic Ryan, watching, felt all his scorn and disgust of Roy Fox melt and
slump into a puddle of pity: for the sight of the bottle was a bigger
thing to the man than any insult, and Roy took it, drank a third of it
without stopping, then looked at his sister with his eyes steaming and
told her she was a peach.

They rode down the slope. What looked like a scarecrow in the scratchy
garden-patch froze and cowered and ran bleating into the shack. That was
the wife. What looked like a small white ape scuttled in after her—that
was the kid. They rode on, passing the brush margins, and there were the
oxen, the plow, and the nester.

Roy took another drink. Vic Ryan got his carbine out of its boot and
laid it across his belt-buckle. He’d always liked a carbine. Delia
sucked in her lips.

The nester broke and ran, and Roy Fox laughed a rich, deep man’s laugh
and spurred his horse. The nester turned to look as he ran, his foot
caught a clod, and over he went, withers and rump. Roy let out a roar
and a Rebel yell and the nester scrambled to his hands and knees and
leaped downhill once, twice, three times like a huge hop-toad. Then he
was at the shack and inside, and the crazy split-rail and cowhide door
banged shut.

The three Circle F riders cantered up and crowded the door. Roy’s eyes
were bright and his cheeks pink. “Outta your hole, gopher-boy!” he
bellowed, and got maybe three syllables of the rich laugh out when the
door swung again on its leather hinges and the nester stood there
blinking at them. He was a big man, made even larger by the great mat of
yellow hair and beard that surrounded his face, and by the tiny doorway
that framed him. His thick left arm hung to the lintel above him, his
right arm and shoulder were squeezed out of sight by the doorframe. Deep
in Vic Ryan’s mind was an indelible picture, and this man brought it
blazing to him again: a bear he had once hamstrung with a bad shot, its
useless hind legs crowded against a rock, its foreclaws flexing, its
little eyes, dark but also incandescent, hurt and hating, reading Vic’s
face from side to side as it wagged its head; and it panted like this
man—too fast, too hard, a harsh series of whispered moans.

“You got to get off this land, gopher-boy,” Roy exulted, still full of
downhill speed and whiskey.

Delia said, out of the side of her tight mouth, “Three weeks.”

“Yeah, three weeks,” Roy said.

“Or we’ll be back,” spat Delia.

“Yeah, back,” said Roy, “with a keg of gunpowder and a—”

But just then the nester said hoarsely, “No!” and pulled out that right
arm and hand; and in it was a single-barreled shotgun which, at that
range, looked like a field-piece. “No,” the man gasped, “you go.” He
moved the gun. “Go, you go.” His own huge inhalation sucked his lips
shut with an audible slap, and they could hear the rest of the breath
hiss into his nostrils; he could say no more with words, but only with
the mad hurt-animal eyes.

Roy Fox squeaked like a booted mouse and rocked back in the saddle, to
wheel; but he jerked the lines so hard his horse squealed and reared
high, staggering forward. The nester stood right under the flailing
hoofs (and if he won’t back up for that, thought Vic, he won’t for
anything on earth) until, for balance, the horse fell away sidewise,
barely keeping its feet, and streaked away grunting and bleeding from
the mouth, with Roy crouched low in the saddle and roweling away like a
cyclist.

Delia’s mount skittered and danced and then followed Roy’s, less
frantically. She cried, in the rusty, taut tones of a sparrowhawk,
“Three weeks!” and let her horse gallop.

Vic Ryan cantered away from the shack slowly, half-turned in his saddle,
his carbine ready, all his attention on the shack and none for his
horse, which he knew would follow the others. He sat that way, cramped
and concentrated for an uphill mile, and still the nester filled the
doorway, the shotgun in his hands, and they filled the air with hate and
fear, until the hill crest intervened and Roy could turn to find the
others.

Roy was just throwing his empty bottle at a hornet’s nest. He missed it.
“I guess I told _him!_”

Delia didn’t say anything. Vic blew, short and sharp, from his nostrils,
so hard he hurt his ears, but he didn’t say anything either.

They rode three miles and camped, and in the morning dark, Vic rose and
left them. He got back two hours before they did, kicked the hell out of
Kewkie, one of the worthless drifting cowhands they had to hire, and got
some sleep in the bunkhouse …

And now the three weeks were gone, and three days more, and Delia was
trying to get him to go raid the nester and gun him out. She loco? He
thought wonderingly. Seen her hot after things before—might’s well try
to turn a stampede with a willow switch; but nothing like this nester
business, the way she’s got her ears laid back. Vic shook his head
slowly, rose and stretched, and went to bed.

It was the darkest predawn when he jolted up to a roaring and
chattering. He sat up grunting, peering at the color of the night
through the open door, sorting out the time of day from the noises he
heard, then sleepily pulling the noises apart. It was Roy Fox, charging
around the bunkhouse in the dark and calling him. He heard the flat of a
hand strike flesh, and Roy’s roar, “There you are, Ryan! Come up out of
there,” and the whimper, “It’s me, Kewkie, Mr. Fox.”

“I’m over her,” growled Vic, and his nose confirmed what his ears had
told him: Roy Fox was crazy drunk.

“Well, come on,” Roy yelled. “We got a chore to do.” He started one of
his Rebel yells but got to coughing.

“Come on where?”

Roy Fox aimed himself at Vic’s voice. “You told Dele you’d take my
orders, right from here to that gopher hole?”

“The nester. My God, Roy—”

“Put up or shut up. You got my orders, you’ll have ’em all the way. Come
on now, jump, damn you! I’m go’ git me a yella pelt and nail it up in
the honeywell an’ use it to—”

“Your sister ready to ride?”

“What you think I am? This here’s a _man’s_ chore. She can stay here and
keep house.”

“Well, hell just froze over,” muttered Vic. He pulled on his Levi’s and
hung on the holster. He saw it all—his flat refusal to do this job
unless Roy bossed it, Delia’s determination to find some way, somehow,
to make it happen. Enough of her rasping nag, enough firewater,
enough—well, that would be enough. He sighed and got his hat. “Come on
then.”

They saddled up and rode.

Within the first hour Vic Ryan was so heartily sick of the whole
project, and everything and everyone connected with it, that it took an
effort of will not to cut away and head straight over the mountains to
the south, leaving the valley forever. He had help, however, in keeping
the course with Roy. It was that thing within him, waiting all these
years, waiting for a certain something from Roy, a certain something
from Delia. It had divined that he need not wait much longer.

It had better not be much longer.

Roy’s voice went on and on in the dimming dark, exultant, laced with
that rich, deep laughter, avid, eager. “… woman’s fine in a kitchen and
not too bad with her nose in a ledgerbook, but the fightin’ and the
ridin’s not for them. You been the places I been, Vic ol’ hick”—this
brought on a paroxysm of alcoholic appreciation from its author, but
nothing from the audience—“you learn about ladies. They have feelin’s.
Sensibilities. Now that nester froggin’ and’ hoppin’ down the hill, they
can see a thing like that and only laugh.” He laughed. “But the job
we’re gonna do, a little hollerin’ when we stick ’em, a little red ink
splashed around—you know—we wouldn’t want the ladies in on that. For
men’s work—_men_,” he boomed. He got the cork out of a bottle with his
teeth. “The ladies, bless ’em!” He gurgled and went _ahh_ shrilly; the
sound recalled to Ryan the hoarse panting of the nester (or was it the
hamstrung bear?). In revulsion he learned, on the instant, a trick of
voluntary deafness, so that the universe contracted to the trail jerkily
unrolling under the horses’ hoofs, sealing seethings from that impatient
thing inside of him, and Roy Fox’s voice became just a drone conveying
nothing.

When next he tuned in the voice, the melody had changed. “You’d never
know it to look at me,” Roy was saying sorrowfully, “but I’m a man of
culture, having received, back East, an enviable education, among people
among whom, my sickly-hickly friend, you’d be lost among …”

“Give me a drink, Roy,” said Vic, and took the proffered bottle and
hurled it against a rock. “By gosh, it slipped right out of my hand,” he
said.

Roy Fox looked deeply injured. “I shall not chastise you for that, Ryan.
I shall simply withhold my gentlemanly instincts and refrain from
sharing the next bottle with any such piebald pismire as you.” He broke
out another bottle, drank, and dramatically corked it. Ryan disconnected
him again, and lapsed into the jogging miasma he had just invented.

The growling of his stomach at length became noisy enough, and a
midmorning sun high enough, to call him back to an earth on which he had
saddled up without breakfast. He pulled up and dismounted.

“Whassamatta?” Roy wanted to know.

“Eat something,” said Vic shortly.

“I give the orders around here,” said Roy Fox in an ugly voice.

“Order us to pull up and spread some chuck then,” said Ryan wearily.

“Very well,” said Roy with a grand wave of the hand. “You will halt here
an’ prepare shushtenance.” He fell off his horse.

Ryan let him lie there and got a fire going. He broke out some Arbuckle
coffee, put it in a can, filled it from the nearby brook, and set it on
a flat stone in the fire to boil. He tore up some sourdough bread and
put some bacon in the skillet. Then he stepped over Fox’s prone figure
and went through the man’s saddlebags. He found one bottle, two-thirds
gone. He put it back. He saw to his disgust that the man’s rifle boot
was empty; on a hunch he felt down inside it and found a pint flask of
whiskey. He hurled it away into the woods. Then he bent over Roy Fox and
pulled him to a sitting position.

“Come on, Roy. Soup’s on.” Fox merely mumbled incoherently and hung his
head; when Ryan released him he sagged like a half-bag of oats. Ryan
cursed and went back to the fire and ate.

For two endless hours Roy lay like that, defying shouts, slaps and the
smell of the powerful coffee. At last Ryan squatted on his heels and did
nothing but wait. When Fox stirred at last, Ryan arose, grunting from
pins-and-needles in his legs, and got the can of coffee. He handed it
over without a word, and Roy Fox bent his head over the fumes. Without
drinking any, he set the can down delicately and said in an apologetic
tone, “Li’l eye-opener, y’know?” and pulled himself up beside his horse.
He found the remaining third of a bottle, drank it thirstily, and said
in a strong clear voice, “Now for some of that coffee—go just right.” He
sank to his knees, sipped twice, then gulped down the coffee. He was
quite still for a time, then threw up his head, belched loudly, started
at the sound, and looked all around him. “Where am I?”

Ryan told him. Told him why, too.

Roy Fox just shook his head, wondering, disbelieving, denying—Ryan could
not know. Ryan swung up on his horse. “Well, let’s get it over with.”

Roy Fox hesitated, then slowly followed suit.

They rode in silence for another hour, and then Fox began fumbling in
his clothes, his saddlebags, even the rifle boot. Once was not enough;
he searched again and again. At last he spurred up beside Ryan. “Got any
whiskey, Vic?”

“No.”

Roy fell back again. For another hour, silence. Once Ryan thought he
heard weeping, but he could not bring himself to turn. Then, “Vic!”

Ryan moved over to the side of the trail to allow Fox to ride up, but he
did not. “Vic?” he called again.

Ryan cursed, wheeled, and cantered back. “Now what the hell?”

Fox wet his lips. “What we want with that nester? What’s he done to us?”

“What’s bothererin’ you, Roy?”

“Valley’s too small, him and us? Outside our land, takes a whole day to
ride between …”

His voice expressing a patience he did not feel, Vic Ryan said softly,
“What’s the matter, Roy? What do you want to do?”

“Well, I don’t know what the hell we’re doing out here.”

“Afraid Gopher-boy’ll take your ear off with his shotgun?”

“That ain’t it!” snapped Roy.

“You’re like a steam train, Roy—you can carry just so much to stoke
yourself with and when that’s gone you quit.”

“What are you talking about?”

“Guts. Whiskey.”

“Now look, damn it, I give the orders and you don’t ask why. Didn’t you
come out on my orders—didn’t I tell you you’d have my orders all the
way?”

“That was the arrangement.” The waiting thing inside him fairly hummed
with tension.

“Well,” said Roy Fox smugly, “you’ll ride back to the Circle F, starting
now, with me, and that’s an order.” He turned his horse and started
along the back trail.

“Yes, sir, boss,” said Vic Ryan, and drew his carbine, and shot Roy Fox
through the head. Fox stiffened, made an ineffectual gesture with both
hands, and fell forward. His horse started slightly and then began to
jog toward the Circle F. Ryan spurred his mount and he began to gallop,
also toward the Circle F. “Yes, sir,” Ryan said again. He drew alongside
the other horse and caught the jouncing body just as it was about to
slide off. “Whoa,” he crooned, and both horses stopped.

Ryan dropped off, still supporting the corpse, and it was only then that
the rage overcame him—a flood, a flame of it. Or perhaps it had been
there all along, and only now emerged where he could see it.

Finally it washed by, leaving the husk of that waiting thing inside him,
and some dull lumpy leavings at the bottom of it. It was this he had
waited for, all these years, and what all the years of waiting had been
for. All that was left was this nameless lump of leftovers. He’d scour
that out too—he knew he would; he knew it couldn’t be cleaned out here,
but he knew he’d do it.

Time enough—time enough for all that. He was used to waiting for the
time to come. He turned the body belly-down across the saddle and
snugged it with a lariat, shoulders to ankles, under the cinch.
Finished, he stopped to watch a mosquito treading the dead man’s
neckerchief with its delicate feet as it slowly made its way to the
strip of flesh that showed between silk and denim; then he swung up into
the saddle.

He was asleep when he reached the Circle F. It was after sundown,
raining a little, and he awoke slumped in the saddle, with the dark
bulks of house, bunkhouse, saddle shed, and barn about him in the yard.
He climbed down stiffly and for a moment leaned his head against the
arch of the horse’s neck. His eyes closed and he very nearly slept
again; he had never in his life been this tired. He straightened his
back and struck himself roughly on the cheekbones with the palms of his
cold wet fists, and turned on the wet knots of the lariat. He pulled the
body by its shoulders and it slid off into the mud while he respectfully
held the head high enough so it wouldn’t go down too. It was a respect
indicating only how completely through he was with Roy Fox; he had
nothing left for him—no vengeance, not even disgust. He dragged the body
into the saddle shed and turned it over on its back in the dark there.
He went out and shut the door and returned to the horses. He turned them
into the corral and threw the saddles into the bunkhouse. He didn’t know
what he was doing, but he didn’t have to. He hadn’t been able to see in
the saddle shed either, and he hadn’t needed to.

Someone came in. A lantern. “Vic?”

“Yuh.”

She said, “Where’s Roy?”

“Saddle shed.”

The lantern went away. He turned to where he had thrown the saddles on
the floor and kicked them with his boot toe. The lantern came back.
“What are you going to do?”

“Sleep.”

He stumbled away, but her hand held him. She said, “Don’t stay out here,
Vic.” She led him to the woodshed which adjoined the pantry connecting
with the kitchen, and then across a floor and around a corner and
through a door. The bed there was softer than a bed ought to be, but he
was conscious hardly long enough to be aware of that.… Being dead turned
the saddle shed into pale blue paint and crazy-quilt, chintz, rag rugs,
and a spool rocker … how was old Ryan making out in the house?

Then a slight sound from the doorway chased the dream, and he wasn’t Roy
Fox lying lifeless in the saddle shed but Vic Ryan lying here looking
at—he clutched the quilt to his bare chest and gasped like a schoolgirl.

“It’s all right,” said Delia, coming in.

He had never seen her this way. Her hair, no longer skull-tight and
bunned, was parted in the middle, and two braids framed her face. She
wore a close-fitting robe with a huge skirt right down to the floor, and
it was the palest pink at the top and gradually got to be scarlet at the
bottom. She had lip-rouge on, too, and her lips weren’t clamped tight
and sucked in any more. She walked over to the bed and sank down on the
floor until their heads were at a level and all he could see of her
garment was the pale pink part. He cast a nervous glance over her head
at the door.

“It’s all right,” she said again. “There’s nobody around but us.”

“What about Kewkie?”

“I sent him to town to tell the sheriff about Roy.”

He tried to swallow but there wasn’t anything to swallow. His mouth was
dry as an alkali flat in a droughty August. “Tell him _what_ about Roy?”

“How he got killed.”

Vic Ryan didn’t say anything.

“Got killed fighting with the nester,” she amended.

His mouth opened and breath rushed in, but nothing could come out
because of the cool hand she laid on it. “It makes everything come out
right,” she said. He wished she would talk without fixing her eyes so
hard on him; he felt like a skunk pitchforked to a henhouse wall. She
got larger, or moved closer, he couldn’t tell which. “Vic …” she said.

He wanted something of this woman, and he couldn’t name the thing he
wanted. He knew, though, what he didn’t want. “Where’s my clothes?”

“Vic,” she whispered.

“Where’s my clothes?” She was still for so long that he turned to look
at her. “Well?”

“I’ll get them,” she said in a low voice. She rose and turned with one
motion so that she did not face him again. He lay looking out the
window, eastward down the valley, and the only thought he could capture
was something that couldn’t matter now: Roy had been the only one at
Circle F who didn’t care if the nester came or went.

He heard the soft _plath_ of cloth on wood, but did not turn his head
until he heard the door close. Then he rose and for the first time in
years dressed from neck to toenails in clean, ironed, mended garments.
He found his boots by the bed—not the ones he had worn last night, but
dry ones from the bunkhouse, all scraped and oiled.

He stepped out into the kitchen. Hot coffee steamed in a china mug
beside a platter of eggs and bacon, a bowl of butter with the
paddle-marks still on it, and bread that had to be oven-new, for he
could smell it. “Dig in,” she said.

He wondered why she had to speak before he could notice that she had
changed while he was dressing; she now wore a simple, starched house
dress with bright little strawberries and green leaves printed over it.
He had seen her in it before, but never with her hair this way and her
mouth all different. He sat down before the food, and saliva squirted so
heartily he felt pain under his tongue.

“You sure fix everything the way it should be.”

She shot him a quick look, “Everything?”

He ate, thinking hard about eating; but pretty soon he’d eaten it all,
so he had to say, “Roy’s dead. Ain’t things a little cheery around
here?”

“Yes!” she said fiercely.

“All right,” he said. He watched her picking up dishes, the way she
moved. “You thought right away it was the nester done it?”

“Anybody would think so—why not? Didn’t he threaten us all with a gun? I
was there. I remember. You were there. Besides, he’s just a squatter and
Roy had the right to drive him out.”

“I tell my story, you tell yours, and everything’s all straightened
out.”

“Yes,” she said. Suddenly she smiled at him. He didn’t like it. She
asked, “Thought about what you’ll do then?”

He hadn’t but he did now, and there was no hesitation. “I’m going to get
just as far away from here as I can get.”

She came quietly and sat down opposite him at the table. “You wouldn’t
do that.” She was gazing at him the way she had in the bedroom; he could
feel it like heat on his lowered eyelids.

He muttered, “I couldn’t stay here without … with just the two of us.
People would … it wouldn’t be right.”

“It could be right, if—”

Slowly he raised his eyes. Hers were fixed on her hands, which turned
and churned and pressed each other, trembling. Abruptly he laughed. “I
still don’t have but a saddle and a skillet!”

She colored. “Oh … you remember everything, don’t you?” Suddenly she
took his hand. It burned him. She said, “Can’t you see it’s all
different now? I have all this—everything. And besides, you never could
understand: it wasn’t me who turned you down, it was Roy. Roy wouldn’t
chance a better man as a relative. If I’d married you, he’d have thrown
us both out, or burned down the place if we wouldn’t go. That was the
one thing he prided himself on all these years—keeping you on, keeping
us apart.”

“I still don’t have nothing.”

“You do! You do! Or you would … I have the Circle F, but you have me!”
she cried.

And now, only now, he knew what else it was that had been
waiting—waiting all these years deep inside him—part and parcel of the
thing he had relieved on the trail yesterday. “Ask me right out.”

“Wh-what?”

“Ask me,” he said. Something began to pulse, to kick. “Ask me what you
want.”

“I don’t—”

“I’m going to roll my blanket,” he said. “I’ll leave as soon as—”

“Marry me,” she whispered, and lowered her face to her arm.

He laughed. “I can’t hear you.”

“Marry me.”

“Beg me.”

“Why you—you …”

She stood up and looked down at his laughing face. “I do, Victor—I beg
you marry me.”

And that was the other thing, and that was all. His secret place closed
down on itself with its secrets gone, and he could feel it healing; and
he yelled, _“NO, by God!”_

When he looked down at her face he was frightened. He sidled up off the
bench, his eyes on her like those of a hypnotized bird, and backed off a
safe two paces. For moments they hung like that, and then there was the
thump and rumble of horses, and they turned to stare out at the yard.
The sheriff, three deputies, the coroner, Kewkie. They dismounted, and
went where Kewkie pointed—the saddle shed.

Delia’s voice, when she spoke, had the frightening overtones of that
hawk’s shriek Vic had heard the day they warned the nester. She said,
“Better have your story straight when they come in. It’s got to be the
same now as at the trial.”

“I’m not worried.”

“You should be,” she said. “When we cornered the nester he ran for his
gun. What he brought out must have been the only gun he had—a shotgun.
Roy wasn’t killed by a shotgun.”

“All this time you—”

“I could testify the nester had a carbine,” she said coolly. “And if you
did too it would be the word of both of us against the nester. I’d be
glad to testify that way, Vic, if you wanted me to.”

“Well, I want you to.”

“Matter of fact, there’s a way to keep me from testifying against
you—ever.”

Steps on the porch, knuckles on the door. “Yes,” he said blackly. “I
know three ways.” He turned his back on her and opened the door.

“Howdy, Vic. Miss Fox.”

“Howdy, Sheriff. You been in the saddle shed?”

“A second,” said the sheriff. He was a gray little man with what looked
like brand-new eyes. “Doctor’s in there now. I saw all I needed. Sorry,
Miss Fox.”

Delia clasped her hands together, watching Vic Ryan. “Did you get the
nester?” she asked the sheriff.

“He’s safe and snug in the jailhouse,” said the sheriff.

Vic’s eyes met Delia’s. With sudden, profound composure she inquired,
“Well, what can we do for you now, Sheriff?”

“Just tell me what you know,” said the sheriff. “Miss Fox? Vic?”

“I’ll give you mine first,” said Vic Ryan tautly. To Delia, he said,
“Marrying you is the first way. This here’s the second.”

“What?” asked the sheriff.

“Nothing. Something we were talking about when you came in. Sheriff, I
killed Roy Fox—shot him going away, on the trail. That nester, he didn’t
have but a shotgun.”

Delia Fox screamed.

The sheriff blinked. “Well, that’s enough to start out with. I’ll have
to have your gun, Vic.”

“The carbine? It’s in the bunkhouse. Or were you talking about this
one?” and he unholstered his Colt and held it so it pointed exactly on
the bowknot on the cotton belt of Delia Fox’s starched house dress.
“This here’s the third way,” he said softly.

Nobody breathed for a time. Then the sheriff said, “You better stop
playing around now, Vic.”

“Sure,” said Vic, and handed him the gun. “I wouldn’t shoot you, Delia.
You’re dead already. I hope you live to be a hundred and twelve and
spend it countin’ your money.”

Delia Fox cast her eyes in one wide arc, taking in the shabby Circle F,
its people, all its shabby years. She gasped, “But the nester—”

“Oh, that nester, sure,” said the sheriff grimly. “You know, folks, I’d
give a good deal to hear the story you were about to tell just
now … guess I never will, and it don’t really matter any more. The
nester—I got him in jail all right. Had him there three days, going on
four, tucked in safe and snug with his wife and kid. That’s where he
wanted to be, so we let him. You folks scared the chips out that pore
farmer; he wouldn’t’ve stayed on his little spread past your deadline to
save his everlastin’.”

Delia covered her face.

Vic Ryan said, “Roy would’ve been real proud.”

The sheriff said, “So you see how perplexin’ it was to be keepin’ a man
in the jailhouse for his own protection, and then have someone ride in
with the rumor he’d killed Roy Fox fifty miles away.” Delia whispered,
“Vic, please—”

“Come on,” said Vic Ryan to the sheriff. “Whatever she’s got to say, I’d
still rather hang.” Inside, he felt good, the way a man must feel if he
has everything, has done everything, he ever really wanted.



THE DEADLY INNOCENT


PEOPLE LOVE ELOISE MICHAUD—by the millions they love her. Eloise wrote
_To Bed, To Bed_, which sold more copies than _Gone with the Wind_—more,
even, than _Furilla’s Rose_, which Ellie Michaud also wrote. The critics
throw up their hands and the sophisticated cry corn, and she sells and
sells and sells.

She writes as if she truly believes in the Triumph of Good over Evil.
Eloise does believe—evenly, sweetly and firmly—in enforcing virtue by
summary execution. But neither readers nor critics know about that. Her
characters, for all their Diors and Dusenbergs, live in the Age of
Chivalry, when Knighthood was in Flower, and dispense unalloyed and
unabashed Romance. Millions love it, and her.

Eloise, in turn, loved a guy. She met him at a literary tea, right after
he had called a newspaperman Mister and then punched him in the nose.

“You can’t talk about Miss Michaud that way around _me_, Mister.”
_Wham!_

She asked somebody who he was, and, for a while, nobody could find out,
because he had nothing to do with the book business, he was only one of
the loving millions.

When she did hear his name, that was about it, all by itself. The only
time she had ever voted in her young life, it was for Vito Marcantonio,
and that sight unseen and solely because she had never heard a lovelier
name.

The honest-to-Christmas name of this cavalier of the cocktails was
Lancelot deMarcopolo, pronounced MarCOpolo. He was in the automobile
business, not the business that buys and sells cars, but the business
that buys and sells car dealers.

Eloise got herself introduced by a queenly crook of the fingers. She
acknowledged him with a regal inclination of her kitten head and
demanded the rosebud from his lapel. She took the flower and, holding it
with both hands, placed it in the soft concavity between her chin and
her lower lip. Over it, she glowed at him.

During their subsequent meetings, which were soon and often, Lance
confessed and anatomized his passion for her. He even gave her its (the
passion’s, of course) biography. It had been born of a book jacket, the
one responsible for the only really nice thing ever said about Eloise
Michaud in a metropolitan review—“The photo-portrait on the book jacket
will move as many books as, say, good writing might. To be honest,
however, the picture is worth quite the price of the volume. Miss
Michaud is the most scrumptious scrivener ever to set pen to the paper
of a book-club contract.”

Lance deMarcopolo bought this picture, book attached, for his night
table, and found himself reading the thing. It was the first real book
he had read all the way through since _Raggedy Andy_ and it entranced
him.

“Who,” he once answered a critical friend, “_wants_ to read about people
you know, anyway?”

He found complete harmony between book and portrait. Both were open,
honest, innocent, _good_. He was not disenchanted as he came to know
her, either. He found what he looked for. Other men had found the same
things, but he was the first to believe his own eyes.

Ultimately, he asked her to marry him—just what she wanted him to
ask—and he did it just the way she wanted him to, in a penthouse, on his
knees, with the lamps low, and sweet music murmuring from somewhere. She
said yes, and he took her home at a decent hour and removed his hat
before kissing her good night. Eloise sighed as the door closed after he
left, then went and banged the typewriter all night.

They set a date and made a lot of arrangements, which required pretty
close timing what with his out-of-town affairs and her lecture tour and
press interviews and all. It was his charming conceit to have her begin
married life with nothing she had owned before—everything new,
everything custom-made.

Eloise was charmed—with all that royalty money in the bank she could
afford it. Exceptions to the regime of burnished newness were few—the
manuscript and notes for her unfinished book, the ancient typewriter on
which she had written everything she ever published, some heirloom
jewelry.

Then Binghamton reared its head.

She called him, in desperation, at the last possible moment and
explained. This was the one lecture she hadn’t been able to cancel or
postpone. The only possible way to handle everything in time for the
honeymoon plane reservations was for her to go to Binghamton now—and so,
would he pick up just those one or two things at her place and get them
checked somewhere safe.

She’d leave the door on the latch and put everything where he could see
it when he came in, there was a dear, _dear_ man, what would she ever do
without him? Lance soothed her and said of course he would do it, or
anything else his little princess commanded, all she had to do was just
give him tiny little hints, she needn’t even ask. He said they would
meet at the airline terminal in the morning, and added a number of other
remarks having much to do with a new life in a new world and little to
do with this narrative.

As it turned out, his agreement was impulsive and impractical. It was
acutely inconvenient for him to do anything of the kind. He realized
this as he set down the phone, and experienced one second of horror at
his impracticality. This was followed by a towering disdain for
himself—_What, call yourself in love? Deny your little princess a little
favor just for a little inconvenience?_

His pendulum swung violently to the other extreme. He jammed his hat on,
snapped one order—“Take care of everything, Joe”—at his thunderstruck
assistant, and took, not an hour, but the entire day for his princess’
small favor.

Once he had accomplished the enormous thing, he ceased to worry or even
think about it—perhaps the secret of his considerable success—and,
turning his back on chaos, gave himself over to the service of his
beloved.

He found the place easily, took the elevator upstairs and went down the
narrow corridor to her room. He stood there for a long moment, lost in
emerald mists of reminiscence and shocking-pink clouds of anticipation,
then removed his hat and turned the knob. He clicked the lock as he
closed the door behind him and stood, smiling fatuously into the sweet
disorder of her parting from this chrysalis.

Much of the furniture was gone, and the pieces that were left were all
tagged—for the Salvation Army, for the superintendent, for one or two
persons whose names he didn’t recognize. In one corner of the room was a
tumbled clutter of miscellany—a scratched tabouret, some pictures with
broken frames, a four-foot model of an Eskimo kayak, a mound of books,
papers and magazines, dusty curtains, drapes and slip-covers. Tacked to
the north wall, strung around the tabouret and tacked again to the west
wall, was a piece of twine, forming a sort of fence around this
particular jetsam. Hanging from it was a piece of paper folded in half.
On the paper, lettered legibly and tersely, were the words THROW OUT.

Piled just inside the door were the things she wanted to keep, from all
her past, to take into her life with him. There were the old typewriter
and a mahogany case—the heirlooms. On top of the case sat a cardboard
box, the kind in which one buys a ream of bond paper. It was lettered
WIP, which he properly translated as WORK IN PROGRESS.

On this lay the heavy gold-and-leather frame in which he had enshrined
his picture, _All my Love, Lance_, and, eclipsing this, was a folded
sheet of paper. He picked it up. It read, _Lance, I do love you so,
Ellie_.

Although it was hardly inspired copy, it stopped his heart for a giddy
moment. Anyone else might read those words as just those words—he heard
them in her eager half-whisper.

He was delicately fanned by her long lashes as they swept up on _do_ and
down on _so_. He knew her special fragrance and even, for a moment,
sensed a sort of nearness which was not heat nor odor nor sound, but
just—nearness. He let his breath whistle through his nostrils and stood
there, shaking his head and murmuring her name.

He opened his eyes on the dangling sign which said, so pitilessly, THROW
OUT, and for the very first time felt a small curl of regret. She had so
submissively agreed to his half-playful dictum to wipe out the past,
that he had never thought of what it might cost her.

He crossed to the twine barrier and ran his gaze over the clutter behind
it. He suddenly bent and took up another bond-paper box, also with WIP
inscribed upon it. It was dusty and cracked, and written across one
corner was _Furilla’s Rose_.

Here, he thought, were the worksheets, the carbons, the notes—all the
mysterious machine-filings and mold-castings from which a great novel
comes—filings and castings Eloise had lived with, slaved over, hoped and
dreamed upon—her second novel. Now, because of his arbitrary whim, they
were tossed on a heap with a broken kayak and some dusty drapes, under a
sign which commanded THROW OUT.

His passion for her mounted the shoulders of his strange reverence for
books, a reverence sometimes encountered in the non-reader, and rose
towering over him. He took the box over to the stenographer’s chair
pushed against the window, sat down with it on his lap, opened it, read—

_Furilla threw back the drapes and let in a rush of dawn, a very shout
of ruddy gold. Then, standing before the tall pier-glass, she flung away
her robe and made another daybreak, another, rosier morning in the
room_.

Yes, it was the famous opening of _Furilla’s Rose_. How strange it
looked in typescript, in grey-haloed carbon! What currents, what depths
flowed and swirled in his kitten-princess!

He leafed on.

_“Bitch!” Kane shouted hoarsely, “You—you bitch!” His red-rimmed eyes
swung close as he bent over her, sitting cool and poised. “Say
something, damn you! Can’t you hear me?”_

_“Yes thank you,” said Furilla quietly, “I’ll have a crumpet.” She
smiled up into his purple, baffled face and added, “Yes, I hear you. The
last thing I heard, the last thing a lady could hear, was when you
offered me a crumpet.”_

That’s my Ellie! thought Lance deMarcopolo fondly. If it was ugly, she
didn’t know it was there until it went away.

He skimmed on, through the tremendous sequence where Furilla met Maserac
and went to live in his house. Maserac was an Older Man, and poor
Furilla was quite sure that Older Men were safe.

_“I’m a very lonely man,” said Maserac, “and to have you in my big old
house would be like having the sun shining in all the windows at once.”_

_“Oh, you mustn’t be lonely! I’ll come, I’ll do everything for you.”_

_He tilted her heart-shaped face up with his strong old hand and looked
piercingly down into her eyes. “Ah, Furilla—do you know
what … everything … might mean?”_

_“Yes, oh yes!” she cried. “You never had a little daughter. I’ll be
your very own dear little daughter!”_

_Maserac’s hand fell away. “I’m ashamed,” he whispered, “so ashamed!”_

That was a close one, thought deMarcopolo admiringly. He turned the leaf
over, and a blue slip fell out. He bent and picked it up. It was from a
desk memo pad and was imprinted with _Office of the Publisher_. He
didn’t mean to read it, but he couldn’t help it.

_It’ll be just like having the sun shining in all the windows at once_.

_I’ll have a cab in front of your place at seven_.

          _Your own_

                _Brill_.

DeMarcopolo sat staring at the paper, holding it between thumb and
forefinger, flapping it like a small blue wing. Brill … Brill? Oh! Brill
MacIver! _That_ old fool—the publisher who …

He shook himself, or shuddered, then set the box down on the floor. He
got up and took off his topcoat and draped it over the back of the
chair, then sat down again. He put the box back on his lap. He didn’t
skim it lightly now, though he didn’t know why. He went rapidly through
the sheets.

He got to that scene between Furilla and young Harald. Harald had come
into Furilla’s life “like a great storm” and, in a famous sequence,
there had been a storm—a beaut. It built and built outside, glaring and
crashing, silhouetting Harald against its lightning flashes as he
climbed in her window. It built and built still more as he pressed
closer and closer to Furilla, until, when he reached her, the clouds
rolled and the thunder banged and, at last—_zing!—_a mighty flash burned
down the boathouse.

Just here, a paperclip separated some pages from the main manuscript. It
was the scene when, next morning, Furilla awoke, alone, bruised,
strangely disturbed, and considered what she was to do.

_She rose, trembling, and ran to the mirror. A dream, a dream—surely it
was a wonderful, terrible dream! But no—there in the smooth hollow
between shoulder and neck, lay the mark of the beast. “Oh!” she cried,
herself to her heart. “Oh wonderful, wonderful beast!”_

_“Maserac!” she screamed_.

_The sound of her own voice frightened her. She cast about wildly, like
a frightened animal, then ran to the wardrobe and threw on the lamé
hostess gown. When the old man opened the door, she stood like a pillar
of gold, her hair, her eyes aflame_.

_“Maserac, Maserac, he loves me!” she sang_.

_And she told him, told him all of it, each syllable bringing her closer
to the joy she knew he would feel for her, for her love, for the life
she had begun with Harald. And, when she had finished, she ran to him,
held his shoulders. “Maserac, isn’t it wonderful?”_

_“Isn’t it wonderful?” he repeated, and cold shock ran through her at
the knell of his voice. “Poor, poor little bird!”_

_“What? Why do you say that, why?”_

_“Dear little Furilla, don’t you know that true love doesn’t come like a
storm? It grows like a flower, unseen, until suddenly it’s there,
blooming.”_

_She recoiled from him. “I—I thought you’d be glad for me, for Harald
and me. I love him, love him, do you hear? And I’m glad, glad!”_

Lance deMarcopolo sat quite still, his eyes on the manuscript but not
doing anything. He remembered the scene, but that was not the way it had
happened in the book.

He uttered a soft, puzzled grunt and turned the page. Under it, lay a
pink flimsy with some single-spaced typescript on it. He knew that Ellie
used pink second-sheets for her correspondence, white for her work. This
must be the copy of a letter to somebody, and perhaps he—but before he
could have any doubts about it, his quick eye had taken it in.

_Hennigar, Hennigar, Hobart Hennigar—it’s like music. Oh Hobie, Hobie,
I’ve been thinking of you, missing you tho’ it’s been only an hour now,
thinking about the wonderful love we have, the wonderful life we shall
share. Hurry back to me, my darling. I do love you so_.

_I do love you so_. A numb place existed suddenly in the pit of Lance’s
stomach. He did not permit himself to think. He went on to the next
sheet—an original, typed with a heavy hand and a pale ribbon on a piece
of business stationery with the letterhead torn off.

_Got your note. Been thinking too, especially since I got it. You can’t
be serious, Ellie. Don’t tell me you fell for that guff I was handing
you. I don’t know what you thought, but I thought I was kidding, talking
like those knights-in-armor in your lousy novel. Charades, you know. As
for what else happened, why not? Fun’s fun_.

_I’m sorry if this hurts you, but I can’t get myself tangled up in
anything like this right now, or ever, and it’s only right to tell you
so, once and for all. I have to say it again—you can’t be serious! Or—do
you really believe people do things like in your book? H_.

_I shouldn’t_, thought deMarcopolo in panic. _This has nothing to do
with …_ But he went on to the next one—another pink carbon.

_Brill dear, I’ll just leave this where you’ll find it when you get
there, I can’t face you now. I’m going back to town. I wish I were dead.
I needn’t be dead, I’ve been killed, killed! Last night, while you were
in the city, Hobart Hennigar did what you tried to warn me about—now I
know, now I understand, when it’s too late. I found out this afternoon_.

_Brill, he talked to me the way I’ve always dreamed a man should talk to
a woman. He was … I thought he was so wonderful, and before I knew it,
it was too late. And now I know what he really is, it was all a game to
him, and he tells me he thought it was all a game to me, too. I despise
myself, Brill dear, but Hennigar—oh! If I were a man, I’d kill him, for
he’s murdered a most precious part of me. Ellie_.

Next was an imprinted office memo, headed _Office of the Publisher_.
Typed by a firm, even hand, were a few lines, which deMarcopolo read
without hesitation.

_Ellie, come back. I’ve got to talk to you about this. Don’t worry. It
will be all right. But come back—you worry me_.

DeMarcopolo shook his head rapidly, like a man swimming up out of
consciousness, and then went back to his reading. Again, it was
manuscript. Same scene, but—oh!…

_She rose, trembling, and ran to the mirror. A dream, a dream, surely it
was a terrible, terrible dream! But no—there in the smooth hollow
between shoulder and neck, lay the mark of the beast. Oh! she cried,
herself to her heart. Oh beast, wicked, brutal beast!_

_“Maserac!” _she screamed. The sound of her own voice frightened her.
She cast about wildly, like a frightened animal, then ran to the
wardrobe and threw on the gold lamé hostess gown. When the old man
opened the door, she stood like a pillar of fire, her hair, her eyes
aflame_._

_“Maserac, Maserac, he’s killed me!”_

_And she told him, told him all of it, each syllable torn from her,
agonizing, yet strangely eager, for each syllable brought her closer to
the comfort, the strength, protection—all wrongs avenged—which she knew
her dear friend would have for her. And, when at last she had finished,
she ran to him, blind with tears, and grasped his shoulders_.

_“He ought to be killed, killed, for what he’s done!”_

_“It’s terrible, terrible!” Cold shock ran through her at the sound of
his voice, for here was no anger, no protecting arm. Here was only an
uneasy laugh. He said, “But—perhaps it isn’t so bad.”_

_“What? Why do you say that, why?”_

_“Dear little Furilla, I know it hurts—but it always hurts to learn
something important. You have been safe with me—only when you turned
away from me, did anything hurt you_.

_Now you know—now, thanks to him, you can turn to me, be with me, be
safe forever, with never a new temptation or hurt.”_

_“Killed!” she cried, “he has to be killed for what he did to me!”_

_“My dear child,” said Maserac, as slowly his arms came about her. “My
dear, my dear …”_

_“No, no!” and she pushed away from him. “He must be punished, he must
be destroyed, or there can be no more Furilla, no more for you, no more,
even, for me …”_

The next one was another handwritten note on the _Office of the
Publisher_ memo paper. “What did she keep them for?” Lance asked himself
in amazement. Reluctantly, he admitted he knew the answer. He read—

_Ellie, for heaven’s sakes answer your phone, or better still, let me
see you. You know I would do anything on earth for you,but this—honey,
to ask for such a thing, even to want it, is insane. Revenge is childish
anyway. Snap out of it, lamb. Get to work again and sweat it out of your
system_.

_Your own_        

_Brill_.

Another pink carbon read—

_Work? How can I work? He has to be punished, Brill, destroyed. Revenge
has nothing to do with it, and I’m surprised you should think of such a
thing. It’s just that, when someone helpless is hurt, someone strong
punishes the wrongdoer for it. It’s the way things are. And I thought
you were the man strong enough. He has to be destroyed, Brill, or there
can be no more Furilla, no more for you, no more, even, for us_.

_Ellie_

So neat, thought deMarcopolo, so orderly. All in sequence—carbon and
second sheets, in moments of passion. He picked up another publishers’
memo.

He read—

_Ellie, this has gone on long enough. I haven’t seen you for weeks, and
I’m frantic. Don’t you know the Book Club contract deadline is almost on
top of us now? You’ve just got to have the first draft of Furilla’s Rose
by contract time, or we’ll lose the whole deal. Your own career is at
stake. If you don’t care about that, think about me_.

_B. MacI_

A pink carbon followed.

_Everything I had to say to you I said in my last note. If you have it,
read it again. If not, I’ll send you a copy_.

_E_

And—

_Ellie, you’re not keeping copies!! Burn them, now. Oh, you’re innocent,
you’ve got to wake up and live in the real world, Ellie, I mean it!_

_Now listen, honey, I hadn’t meant to tell you this, but I’m at the end
of my rope. Everything I own is tied up in this business and, for years,
I’ve been holding it together with my bare hands and a big bright smile,
hoping against hope that the big best seller would come along. Well, it
did—To Bed, To Bed was it, and you wrote it_.

_But a hole that deep takes a lot of filling up. Even sales like that
couldn’t do it, and I won’t tell you how much I still owe. To make it
worse, now that I have one big property, my creditors, people who for
years just let things slide along, now suddenly want to take over. I
can’t let them, Ellie—not now, not at my age, not with real freedom,
real solvency, right in my grasp for the very last time. All I need is
one more big seller, and you’ve got it there for me, and you won’t let
me have it. Ellie, I beg you, on my knees I beg you, finish the book!_

_Brill_.

_I hate pink_, thought deMarcopolo with sudden fury. He controlled the
hand which wanted to crush the pink sheet and read—

_I have said all I can say. I enclose a copy of it. Read it again_.

_E_.

A telegram—its porous yellow startled him like an explosion.

ONLY TEN DAYS TO CONTRACT TIME FOR HEAVENS SAKE ELLIE AT LEAST LET ME
SEE YOU

BRILL MaCIVER

And then, the shortest pink carbon of all—

_Read it again_.

_E_.

DeMarcopolo picked up the next one, _Office of the Publisher_, squinted
at it, then set the box down on the floor and stood up. He moved to the
window, leaned into the light and spelled out the writing slowly, his
lips moving. It was scratched and scrawled, the paper crumpled, speckled
with ink-flecks where the pen had dug in and splattered.

_I must be crazy, and I wouldn’t wonder. Nothing seems real—you, soft
little you, holding out like that for such a thing, I listening to it.
No money, no business in the world, is worth a thing like this, I keep
telling myself, but I know I’m going to do it. Try_

Down at the bottom of the memo sheet was a wavery series of scrawls
which at first seemed like the marks one might make to try out a new
pen—a letter or two, a series of loops and zigzags. But as he stared at
it, it became writing. As nearly as he could make it out, it read—

_I did, and he didn’t know why. My blood damns you ellie_.

Lance deMarcopolo turned like a sleepwalker and slowly put the crumpled
memo down on the pile of papers he had already gone through. He stood
still, swaying slightly, then moved unsteadily toward the corner where
the telephone squatted on the floor, like a damsel in a hoopskirt. He
picked it up, held the receiver to his ear. It was still connected. He
dialed carefully. A cheerful female voice said, “Post-Herald.”

“Get me Joe Birns … Joe? Lance here.”

“Hi, y’old bibliophile! Don’t tell me you’re getting’ cold feet, old
man. Call the whole thing off and give your old pal a scoop.”

“Knock it off, Joe.”

“Hey! ’Sa matter, Lance?”

“Joe, you can find things out without anybody knowing who’s asking.”

“Shucks, Lance, sure. What’s—”

“Brill—MacIver Brill—I want to know what happened to him.”

“Brill? He’s dead.”

“I know, I know.” It seemed, somehow, hard to breathe. “I mean, I want
to know how he died. And somebody else too—hold on.” He put the phone
down on the floor and walked back to the box. He pawed through the
papers for a moment, then returned to the phone. “Joe?”

“Yuh?”

“Somebody called Hobart Hennigar. I think he’s dead too.”

“Hobart Hennigar,” murmured Joe like a man taking notes. “Who dat?”

“That’s what I want to know. Call me back, will you Joe—fast?” He read
the number off the telephone.

“Sure Lance. Hey Lance, are you—is there anything …?”

“Yes, Joe—find me that information.” Lance hung up.

He looked vaguely about the room, everywhere but at the box. Yet,
ultimately, he went back to it, inevitably drawn. Slowly, he sat down
and picked it up, still not looking at it. His hands found the unread
portion and slid over it like a blind man’s. At last he lowered his eyes
and looked.

It was only manuscript:

_ … and threw on the gold hostess gown. When the old man opened the door
she stood like a flame, eyes like coals, hair afire in the golden
morning. “Maserac, Maserac, he’s killed me!”_

_And she told him, told him all of it, each syllable torn from her,
agonized yet strangely eager, for each syllable brought her closer to
the comfort she knew that her dear friend would somehow have for her.
And, when at last she had finished, she ran to him, blind with tears,
and hid in his arms_.

_“My dear, my poor little bird,” said Maserac. His arms closed around
her. “Try to forget, Furilla. Tonight—tomorrow—this will be a world in
which Harald does not exist.” He put her firmly from him, looked for a
long time into her eyes, then slowly turned to the door_.

_“Maserac, Maserac, what are you going to do?”_

_“Do?” He smiled gently. “Surely there is only one thing to do. How
could there be a choice?”_

_He left her_.

_In the morning, they found Harald’s tattered body slumped in his cabin.
And Maserac, dear Maserac—his fury had crushed, not only Harald, but his
own great heart, his dear, dear heart. He lay in an open field, his
slack hand still on the horsewhip, his unseeing eyes turned to the
sunrise, and Furilla knew that her name lay silent on his dead lips_.

“Yeah,” whispered deMarcopolo. The sound was like sighing. “That was the
way the thing came out in the book.”

Everything came out for Furilla. All the world loved Furilla, because
things always happened the way they should for Furilla.

“Yeah,” he said again, still in a whisper.

Furilla, he reflected, never did anything to make things come her way.
She did it just by being soft little, sweet little, innocent little
Furilla—being Furilla beyond all flexibility, beyond all belief.

The phone rang.

“Yes, Joe.”

Joe said, “I don’t know just what details you want about Brill. There’s
a good deal that wasn’t in the papers, though. He went on a wing-ding
and disappeared for two days. They shoveled him up out of a doorway down
in the waterfront district. He was full of white lightning, but whether
that killed him or his pump was due to quit anyhow is a toss-up. That
what you wanted?”

“Close. What about the other one?”

“Took a little digging. Now Hennigar—Hobart Hennigar, thirty-seven,
instructor in English lit and creative writing at some Eastern college,
thrown out three years ago for making a pass at a housemaid. Fast
talker, good looker, fairly harmless. One of these literate bums.
Knocked around, one job to another, wound up out at the lake, caretaker
on a big estate. Ties in with MacIver, in a way, Lance—MacIver had a
place out there too, little lodge. Used to hole up there once in a
while.”

“Was he out there during his drunk?”

“If he was, no one could prove it. Off season, pretty lonesome out
there. Anyway, this Hennigar got himself plugged through the head.
Police report says it was a twenty-five target-type bullet.”

“Fight?”

“Na! Back of the head, from a window in his cabin. He never knew what
hit him, not a clue. Lance—”

“Mm?”

“You got a lead on that killing?”

DeMarcopolo looked slowly around the room. The telephone said, “Lance?”
and he held it away from him and looked at it as if he had never seen it
before.

Then he brought it back and said, “No, I haven’t got a lead on that
killing. Joe, do something for me?”

“Shucks.”

“You covering that thing of mine?”

“Statement at the airport, kissin’ picture? Couldn’t keep me away.”

“I—won’t be there,” said deMarcopolo. “Tell her for me, will you?”

“Lance! What’s hap—”

“Thanks, Joe. ’Bye.” He hung up very quietly.

After a time he crossed to the small pile of things by the door and
picked up the note she had left him and his picture. He tore up the note
and took out the picture and tore it in two. He folded the frame over
the torn paper and tossed it over the string marked THROW OUT. That left
the new box marked WIP staring at him.

He recoiled from it with horror and went on out. Shutting the door, he
said conversationally, “How innocent can you get?” He said it to
MacIver, to Hennigar, to Eloise Michaud and to Lancelot deMarcopolo. But
nobody had an answer for him.



AND NOW THE NEWS …


THE MAN’S NAME WAS MACLYLE, which by looking at you can tell wasn’t his
real name, but let’s say this is fiction, shall we? MacLyle had a good
job in—well—a soap concern. He worked hard and made good money and got
married to a girl called Esther. He bought a house in the suburbs and
after it was paid for he rented it to some people and bought a home a
little farther out and a second car and a freezer and a power mower and
a book on landscaping, and settled down to the worthy task of giving his
kids all the things he never had.

He had habits and he had hobbies, like everybody else, and (like
everybody else) his were a little different from anybody’s. The one that
annoyed his wife the most, until she got used to it, was the news habit,
or maybe hobby. MacLyle read a morning paper on the 8:14 and an evening
paper on the 6:10, and the local paper his suburb used for its lost dogs
and auction sales took up forty after-dinner minutes. And when he read a
paper he read it, he didn’t mess with it. He read Page 1 first and Page
2 next, and so on all the way through. He didn’t care too much for books
but he respected them in a mystical sort of way, and he used to say a
newspaper was a kind of book, and so would raise particular hell if a
section was missing or in upside down, or if the pages were out of line.
He also heard the news on the radio. There were three stations in town
with hourly broadcasts, one on the hour, one on the half-hour, and one
five minutes before the hour, and he was usually able to catch them all.
During these five-minute periods he would look you right in the eye
while you talked to him and you’d swear he was listening to you, but he
wasn’t. This was a particular trial to his wife, but only for five years
or so. Then she stopped trying to be heard while the radio talked about
floods and murders and scandal and suicide. Five more years, and she
went back to talking right through the broadcasts, but by the time
people are married ten years, things like that don’t matter; they talk
in code anyway, and nine-tenths of their speech can be picked up anytime
like ticker-tape. He also caught the 7:30 news on Channel 2 and the 7:45
news on Channel 4 on television.

Now it might be imagined from all this that MacLyle was a crotchety
character with fixed habits and a neurotic neatness, but this was far
from the case. MacLyle was basically a reasonable guy who loved his wife
and children and liked his work and pretty much enjoyed being alive. He
laughed easily and talked well and paid his bills. He justified his
preoccupation with the news in a number of ways. He would quote Donne:
_“… any man’s death diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind …”_
which is pretty solid stuff and hard to argue down. He would point out
that he made his trains and his trains made him punctual, but that
because of them he saw the same faces at the same time day after endless
day, before, during, and after he rode those trains, so that his
immediate world was pretty circumscribed, and only a constant awareness
of what was happening all over the earth kept him conscious of the fact
that he lived in a bigger place than a thin straight universe with his
house at one end, his office at the other, and a railway track in
between.

It’s hard to say just when MacLyle started to go to pieces, or even why,
though it obviously had something to do with all that news he exposed
himself to. He began to react, very slightly at first; that is, you
could tell he was listening. He’d _shh!_ you, and if you tried to finish
what you were saying he’d run and stick his head in the speaker grille.
His wife and kids learned to shut up when the news came on, five minutes
before the hour until five after (with MacLyle switching stations) and
every hour on the half-hour, and from 7:30 to 8:00 for the TV, and
during the forty minutes it took him to read the local paper. He was not
so obvious about it when he read his paper, because all he did was
freeze over the pages like a catatonic, gripping the top corners until
the sheets shivered, knotting his jaw and breathing from his nostrils
with a strangled whistle.

Naturally all this was a weight on his wife Esther, who tried her best
to reason with him. At first he answered her, saying mildly that a man
has to keep in touch, you know; but very quickly he stopped responding
altogether, giving her the treatment a practiced suburbanite gets so
expert in, as when someone mentions a lawnmower just too damn early on
Sunday morning. You don’t say yes and you don’t say no, you don’t even
grunt, and you don’t move your head or even your eyebrows. After a while
your interlocutor goes away. Pretty soon you don’t hear these ill-timed
annoyances any more than you appear to.

It needs to be said again here that MacLyle was, outside his
peculiarity, a friendly and easy-going character. He liked people and
invited them and visited them, and he was one of those adults who can
really listen to a first-grade child’s interminable adventures and
really care. He never forgot things like the slow leak in the spare tire
or antifreeze or anniversaries, and he always got the storm windows up
in time, but he didn’t rub anyone’s nose in his reliability. The first
thing in his whole life he didn’t take as a matter of course was this
news thing that started so small and grew so quickly.

So after a few weeks of it his wife took the bull by the horns and spent
the afternoon hamstringing every receiver in the house. There were three
radios and two TV sets, and she didn’t understand the first thing about
them, but she had a good head and she went to work with a will and the
can-opening limb of a pocket knife. From each receiver she removed one
tube, and one at a time, so as not to get them mixed up, she carried
them into the kitchen and meticulously banged their bases against the
edge of the sink, being careful to crack no glass and bend no pins,
until she could see the guts of the tube rolling around loose inside.
Then she replaced them and got the back panels on the sets again.

MacLyle came home and put the car away and kissed her and turned on the
living room radio and then went to hang up his hat. When he returned the
radio should have been warmed up but it wasn’t. He twisted the knobs a
while and bumped it and rocked it back and forth a little, grunting, and
then noticed the time. He began to feel a little frantic, and raced back
to the kitchen and turned on the little ivory radio on the shelf. It
warmed up quickly and cheerfully and gave him a clear 60-cycle hum, but
that was all. He behaved badly from then on, roaring out the information
that the sets didn’t work, either of them, as if that wasn’t pretty
evident by that time, and flew upstairs to the boys’ room, waking them
explosively. He turned on their radio and got another 60-cycle note,
this time with a shattering microphonic when he rapped the case, which
he did four times, whereupon the set went dead altogether.

Esther had planned the thing up to this point, but no further, which was
the way her mind worked. She figured she could handle it, but she
figured wrong. MacLyle came downstairs like a pallbearer, and he was
silent and shaken until 7:30, time for the news on TV. The living room
set wouldn’t peep, so up he went to the boys’ room again, waking them
just as they were nodding off again, and this time the little guy
started to cry. MacLyle didn’t care. When he found out there was no
picture on the set, he almost started to cry too, but then he heard the
sound come in. A TV set has an awful lot of tubes in it and Esther
didn’t know audio from video. MacLyle sat down in front of the dark
screen and listened to the news. _“Everything seemed to be under control
in the riot-ridden border country in India,”_ said the TV set. Crowd
noises and a background of Beethoven’s “Turkish March.” _“And then_—”
Cut music. Crowd noise up: gabble-wurra and a scream. Announcer over:
_“Six hours later, this was the scene.”_ Dead silence, going on so long
that MacLyle reached out and thumped the TV set with the heel of his
hand. Then, slow swell, Ketelbey’s “In a Monastery Garden.” _“On a more
cheerful note, here are the six finalists in the Miss Continuum
contest.”_ Background music, “Blue Room,” interminably, interrupted only
once, when the announcer said through a childish chuckle, _“… and she
meant it!”_ MacLyle pounded himself on the temples. The little guy
continued to sob. Esther stood at the foot of the stairs wringing her
hands. It went on for thirty minutes like this. All MacLyle said when he
came downstairs was that he wanted the paper—that would be the local
one. So Esther faced the great unknown and told him frankly she hadn’t
ordered it and wouldn’t again, which of course led to a full and
righteous confession of her activities of the afternoon.

Only a woman married better than fourteen years can know a man well
enough to handle him so badly. She was aware that she was wrong but that
was quite overridden by the fact that she was logical. It would not be
logical to continue her patience, so patience was at an end. “That which
offendeth thee, cast it out, yea, even thine eye and thy right hand.”
She realized too late that the news was so inextricably part of her
husband that in casting it out she cast him out too. And out he went,
while whitely she listened to the rumble of the garage door, the car
door speaking its sharp syllables, clear as _Exit_ in a play script; the
keen of a starter, the mourn of a motor. She said she was glad and went
in the kitchen and tipped the useless ivory radio off the shelf and
retired, weeping.

And yet, because true life offers few clean cuts, she saw him once more.
At seven minutes to 3:00 in the morning she became aware of faint music
from somewhere; unaccountably it frightened her, and she tiptoed about
the house looking for it. It wasn’t in the house, so she pulled on
MacLyle’s trench coat and crept down the steps into the garage. And
there, just outside in the driveway, where steel beams couldn’t
interfere with radio reception, the car stood where it had been all
along, and MacLyle was in the driver’s seat dozing over the wheel. The
music came from the car radio. She drew the coat tighter around her and
went to the car and opened the door and spoke his name. At just that
moment the radio said _“… and now the news”_ and MacLyle sat bolt
upright and _shh’d_ furiously. She fell back and stood a moment in a
strange transition from unconditional surrender to total defeat. Then he
shut the car door and bent forward, his hand on the volume control, and
she went back into the house.

After the news report was over and he had recovered himself from the
stab wounds of a juvenile delinquent, the grinding agonies of a derailed
train, the terrors of the near-crash of a c-119, and the fascination of
a cabinet officer, charter member of the We Don’t Trust Nobody Club,
saying in exactly these words that there’s a little bit of good in the
worst of us and a little bit of bad in the best of us, all of which he
felt keenly, he started the car (by rolling it down the drive because
the battery was almost dead) and drove as slowly as possible into town.

At an all-night garage he had the car washed and greased while he
waited, after which the automat was open and he sat in it for three
hours drinking coffee, holding his jaw set until his back teeth ached,
and making occasional, almost inaudible noises in the back of his
throat. At 9:00 he pulled himself together. He spent the entire day with
his astonished attorney, going through all his assets, selling,
converting, establishing, until when he was finished he had a modest
packet of cash and his wife would have an adequate income until the
children went to college, at which time the house would be sold, the
tenants in the older house evicted, and Esther would be free to move to
the smaller home with the price of the larger one added to the basic
capital. The lawyer might have entertained fears for MacLyle except for
the fact that he was jovial and loquacious throughout, behaving like a
happy man—a rare form of insanity, but acceptable. It was hard work but
they did it in a day, after which MacLyle wrung the lawyer’s hand and
thanked him profusely and checked into a hotel.

When he awoke the following morning he sprang out of bed, feeling years
younger, opened the door, scooped up the morning paper and glanced at
the headlines.

He couldn’t read them.

He grunted in surprise, closed the door gently, and sat on the bed with
the paper in his lap. His hands moved restlessly on it, smoothing and
smoothing until the palms were shadowed and the type hazed. The shouting
symbols marched across the page like a parade of strangers in some
unrecognized lodge uniform, origins unknown, destination unknown, and
the occasion for marching only to be guessed at. He traced the letters
with his little finger, he measured the length of a word between his
index finger and thumb and lifted them up to hold them before his
wondering eyes. Suddenly he got up and crossed to the desk, where signs
and placards and printed notes were trapped like a butterfly collection
under glass—the breakfast menu, something about valet service, something
about checking out. He remembered them all and had an idea of their
significance—but he couldn’t read them. In the drawer was stationery,
with a picture of the building and no other buildings around it, which
just wasn’t so, and an inscription which might have been in Cyrillic for
all he knew. Telegram blanks, a bus schedule, a blotter, all bearing
hieroglyphs and runes, as far as he was concerned. A phone book full of
strangers’ names in strange symbols.

He requested of himself that he recite the alphabet. “A,” he said
clearly, and “Eh?” because it didn’t sound right and he couldn’t imagine
what would. He made a small foolish grin and shook his head slightly and
rapidly, but grin or no, he felt frightened. He felt glad, or
relieved—mostly happy anyway, but still a little frightened.

He called the desk and told them to get his bill ready, and dressed and
went downstairs. He gave the doorman his parking check and waited while
they brought the car round. He got in and turned the radio on and
started to drive west.

He drove for some days, in a state of perpetual cold, and (for all that)
happy fright—roller-coaster fright, horror-movie fright. He remembered
the significance of a stop-sign without being able to read the word STOP
across it, and took caution from the shape of a railroad-crossing
notice. Restaurants looked like restaurants, gas stations like gas
stations; if Washington’s picture denotes a dollar and Lincoln’s five,
one doesn’t need to read them. MacLyle made out just fine. He drove
until he was well into one of those square states with all the mountains
and cruised until he recognized the section where, years before he was
married, he had spent a hunting vacation. Avoiding the lodge he had
used, he took back roads until, sure enough, he came to that deserted
cabin in which he had sheltered one night, standing yet, rotting a bit
but only around the edges. He wandered in and out of it for a long time,
memorizing details because he could not make a list, and then got back
into his car and drove to the nearest town, not very near and not very
much of a town. At the general store he bought shingles and flour and
nails and paint—all sorts of paint, in little cans, as well as big
containers of house paint—and canned goods and tools. He ordered a
knockdown windmill and a generator, eighty pounds of modeling clay, two
loaf pans and a mixing bowl, and a war-surplus jungle hammock. He paid
cash and promised to be back in two weeks for the things the store
didn’t stock, and wired (because it could be done over the phone) his
lawyer to arrange for the predetermined eighty dollars a month which was
all he cared to take for himself from his assets. Before he left he
stood in wonder before a monstrous piece of musical plumbing called an
ophicleide which stood, dusty and majestic, in a corner. (While it might
be easier on the reader to make this a French horn or a sousaphone—which
would answer narrative purposes quite as well—we’re done telling lies
here. MacLyle’s real name is concealed, his home town cloaked, and his
occupation disguised, and dammit it really was a twelve-keyed, 1824-era,
50-inch, obsolete brass ophicleide.) The storekeeper explained how his
great-grandfather had brought it over from the old country and nobody
had played it for two generations except an itinerant tuba-player who
had turned pale green on the first three notes and put it down as if it
was full of percussion caps. MacLyle asked how it sounded and the man
told him, terrible. Two weeks later MacLyle was back to pick up the rest
of his stuff, nodding and smiling and saying not a word. He still
couldn’t read, and now he couldn’t speak. Even more, he had lost the
power to understand speech. He paid for the purchases with a one hundred
dollar bill and a wistful expression, and then another one hundred
dollar bill, and the storekeeper, thinking he had turned deaf and dumb,
cheated him roundly but at the same time felt so sorry for him that he
gave him the ophicleide. MacLyle loaded up his car happily and left. And
that’s the first part of the story about MacLyle’s being in a bad way.

MacLyle’s wife Esther found herself in a peculiar position. Friends and
neighbors off-handedly asked her questions to which she did not know the
answers, and the only person who had any information at all—MacLyle’s
attorney—was under bond not to tell her anything. She had not, in the
full and legal sense, been deserted, since she and the children were
provided for. She missed MacLyle, but in a specialized way; she missed
the old reliable MacLyle, and he had, in effect, left her long before
that perplexing night when he had driven away. She wanted the old
MacLyle back again, not this untrolleyed stranger with the grim and
spastic preoccupation with the news. Of the many unpleasant facets of
this stranger’s personality, one glowed brightest, and that was that he
was the sort of man who would walk out the way he did and stay away as
long as he had. Ergo, he was that undesirable person just as long as he
stayed away, and tracking him down would, if it returned him against his
will, return to her only a person who was not the person she missed.

Yet she was dissatisfied with herself, for all that she was the injured
party and had wounds less painful than the pangs of conscience. She had
always prided herself on being a good wife, and had done many things in
the past which were counter to her reason and her desires purely because
they were consistent with being a good wife. So as time went on she
gravitated away from the “what shall I do?” area into the “what ought a
good wife to do?” spectrum, and after a great deal of careful thought,
went to see a psychiatrist.

He was a fairly intelligent psychiatrist, which is to say he caught on
to the obvious a little faster than most people. For example, he became
aware in only four minutes of conversation that MacLyle’s wife Esther
had not come to him on her own behalf, and further decided to hear her
out completely before resolving to treat her. When she had quite
finished and he had dug out enough corroborative detail to get the
picture, he went into a long silence and cogitated. He matched the broad
pattern of MacLyle’s case with his reading and his experience,
recognized the challenge, the clinical worth of the case, the probable
value of the heirloom diamond pendant worn by his visitor. He placed his
fingertips together, lowered his fine young head, gazed through his
eyebrows at MacLyle’s wife Esther, and took up the gauntlet. At the
prospect of getting her husband back safe and sane, she thanked him
quietly and left the office with mixed emotions. The fairly intelligent
psychiatrist drew a deep breath and began making arrangements with
another headshrinker to take over his other patients, both of them,
while he was away, because he figured to be away quite a while.

It was appallingly easy for him to trace MacLyle. He did not go near the
lawyer. The solid foundation of all skip tracers and Bureaus of Missing
Persons, in their _modus operandi_, is the piece of applied psychology
which dictates that a man might change his name and his address, but he
will seldom—can seldom—change the things he does, particularly the
things he does to amuse himself. The ski addict doesn’t skip to Florida,
though he might make Banff instead of a habitual Mont Tremblant. A
philatelist is not likely to mount butterflies. Hence when the
psychiatrist found, among MacLyle’s papers, some snapshots and
brochures, dating from college days, of the towering Rockies, of bears
feeding by the roadside, and especially of season after season’s
souvenirs of a particular resort to which he had never brought his wife
and which he had not visited since he married her, it was worth a
feeler, which went out in the form of a request to that state’s police
for information on a man of such-and-such a description driving
so-and-so with out-of-state plates, plus a request that the man not be
detained nor warned, but only that he, the fairly intelligent
psychiatrist, be notified. He threw out other lines, too, but this is
the one that hooked his fish. It was a matter of weeks before a state
patrol car happened by MacLyle’s favorite general store: after that it
was a matter of minutes before the information was in the hands of the
psychiatrist. He said nothing to MacLyle’s wife Esther except goodbye
for a while, and this bill is payable now, and then took off, bearing
with him a bag of tricks.

He rented a car at the airport nearest MacLyle’s hideout and drove a
long, thirsty, climbing way until he came to the general store. There he
interviewed the proprietor, learning some eighteen hundred items about
how bad business could get, how hot it was, how much rain hadn’t fallen
and how much was needed, the tragedy of being blamed for high mark-ups
when anyone with the brains God gave a goose ought to know it cost
plenty to ship things out here, especially in the small quantities
necessitated by business being so bad and all; and betwixt and between,
he learned eight or ten items about MacLyle—the exact location of his
cabin, the fact that he seemed to have turned into a deaf-mute who was
also unable to read, and that he must be crazy because who but a crazy
man would want eighty-four different half-pint cans of house paint or,
for that matter, live out here when he didn’t have to?

The psychiatrist got loose after a while and drove off, and the country
got higher and dustier and more lost every mile, until he began to pray
that nothing would go wrong with the car, and sure enough, ten minutes
later he thought something had. Any car that made a noise like the one
he began to hear was strictly a shotrod, and he pulled over to the side
to worry about it. He turned off the motor and the noise went right on,
and he began to realize that the sound was not in the car or even near
it, but came from somewhere uphill. There was a mile and half more of
the hill to go, and he drove it in increasing amazement, because that
sound got louder and more impossible all the time. It was sort of like
music, but like no music currently heard on this or any other planet. It
was a solo voice, brass, with muscles. The upper notes, of which there
seemed to be about two octaves, were wild and unmusical, the middle was
rough, but the low tones were like the speech of these mountains
themselves, big up to the sky, hot, and more natural than anything ought
to be, basic as a bear’s fang. Yet all the notes were perfect—their
intervals were perfect—this awful noise was tuned like an electronic
organ. The psychiatrist had a good ear, though for a while he wondered
how long he’d have any ears at all, and he realized all these things
about the sound, as well as the fact that it was rendering one of the
more primitive fingering studies from Czerny, Book One, the droning
little horror that goes: _do mi fa sol la sol fa mi, re fa sol la ti la
sol fa, mi sol la …_ etcetera, inchworming up the scale and then
descending hand over hand.

He saw blue sky almost under his front tires and wrenched the wheel hard
over, and found himself in the grassy yard of a madeover prospector’s
cabin, but that he didn’t notice right away because sitting in front of
it was what he described to himself, startled as he was out of his
professional detachment, as the craziest-looking man he had ever seen.

He was sitting under a parched, wind-warped Engelmann spruce. He was
barefoot up to the armpits. He wore the top half of a skivvy shirt and a
hat the shape of one of those conical Boy Scout tents when one of the
Boy Scouts has left the pole home. And he was playing, or anyway
practicing, the ophicleide, and on his shoulders was a little moss of
spruce needles, a small shower of which descended from the tree every
time he hit on or under the low B-flat. Only a mouse trapped inside a
tuba during band practice can know precisely what it’s like to stand
that close to an operating ophicleide.

It was MacLyle all right, looming well-fed and filled-out. When he saw
the psychiatrist’s car he went right on playing, but, catching the
psychiatrist’s eye, he winked, smiled with the small corner of lip which
showed from behind the large cup of the mouthpiece, and twiddled three
fingers of his right hand, all he could manage of a wave without
stopping. And he didn’t stop, either, until he had scaled the particular
octave he was working on and let himself down the other side. Then he
put the ophicleide down carefully and let it lean against the spruce
tree, and got up. The psychiatrist had become aware, as the last
stupendous notes rolled away down the mountain, of his extreme isolation
with this offbeat patient, of the unconcealed health and vigor of the
man, and of the presence of the precipice over which he had almost
driven his car a moment before, and had rolled up his window and
buttoned the doorlock and was feeling grateful for them. But the warm
good humor and genuine welcome on MacLyle’s sunburned face drove away
fright and even caution, and almost before he knew what he was doing the
psychiatrist had the door open and was stooping up out of the car,
thinking, merry is a disused word but that’s what he is, by God, a merry
man. He called him by name but either MacLyle did not hear him or didn’t
care; he just put out a big warm hand and the psychiatrist took it. He
could feel hard flat calluses in MacLyle’s hand, and the controlled
strength an elephant uses to lift a bespangled child in its trunk; he
smiled at the image, because after all MacLyle was not a particularly
large man, there was just that feeling about him. And once the smile
found itself there it wouldn’t go away.

He told MacLyle that he was a writer trying to soak up some of this
magnificent country and had just been driving wherever the turn of the
road led him, and here he was; but before he was half through he became
conscious of MacLyle’s eyes, which were in some indescribable way very
much on him but not at all on anything he said; it was precisely as if
he had stood there and hummed a tune. MacLyle seemed to be willing to
listen to the sound until it was finished, and even to enjoy it, but
that enjoyment was going to be all he got out of it. The psychiatrist
finished anyway and MacLyle waited a moment as if to see if there would
be any more, and when there wasn’t he gave out more of that luminous
smile and cocked his head toward the cabin. MacLyle led the way, with
his visitor bringing up the rear with some platitudes about ‘nice place
you got here.’ As they entered, he suddenly barked at that unresponsive
back, “Can’t you hear me?” and MacLyle, without turning, only waved him
on.

They walked into such a clutter and clabber of colors that the
psychiatrist stopped dead, blinking. One wall had been removed and
replaced with glass panes; it overlooked the precipice and put the
little building afloat on haze. All the walls were hung with plain white
chenille bedspreads, and the floor was white, and there seemed to be
much more light indoors here than outside. Opposite the large window was
an oversized easel made of peeled poles, notched and lashed together
with baling wire, and on it was a huge canvas, most non-objective, in
the purest and most uncompromising colors. Part of it was unquestionably
this room, or at least its air of colored confusion here and all
infinity yonder. The ophicleide was in the picture, painstakingly
reproduced, looking like the hopper of some giant infernal machine, and
in the foreground some flowers; but the central figure repulsed
him—more, it repulsed everything which surrounded it. It did not look
exactly like anything familiar and, in a disturbed way, he was happy
about that.

Stacked on the floor on each side of the easel were other paintings,
some daubs, some full of ruled lines and overlapping planes, but all in
this achingly pure color. He realized what was being done with the
dozens of colors of house paint in little cans which had so intrigued
the storekeeper.

In odd places around the room were clay sculptures, most mounted on
pedestals made of sections of tree trunks large enough to stand firmly
on their sawed ends. Some of the pedestals were peeled, some painted,
and in some the bark texture or the bulges or clefts in the wood had
been carried right up into the model, and in others clay had been knived
or pressed into the bark all the way down to the floor. Some of the clay
was painted, some not, some ought to have been. There were free-forms
and golliwogs, a marsupial woman and a guitar with legs, and some, but
not an overweening number, of the symbolisms which preoccupy even fairly
intelligent psychiatrists. Nowhere was there any furniture per se. There
were shelves at all levels and of varying lengths, bearing nail-kegs,
bolts of cloth, canned goods, tools and cooking utensils. There was a
sort of table but it was mostly a workbench, with a vise at one end and
at the other, half-finished, a crude but exceedingly ingenious
footpowered potter’s wheel.

He wondered where MacLyle slept, so he asked him, and again MacLyle
reacted as if the words were not words, but a series of pleasant sounds,
cocking his head and waiting to see if there would be any more. So the
psychiatrist resorted to sign language, making a pillow of his two
hands, laying his head on it, closing his eyes. He opened them to see
MacLyle nodding eagerly, then going to the white-draped wall. From
behind the chenille he brought a hammock, one end of which was fastened
to the wall. The other end he carried to the big window and hung on a
hook screwed to a heavy stud between the panes. To lie in that hammock
would be to swing between heaven and earth like Mahomet’s tomb, with all
that sky and scenery virtually surrounding the sleeper. His admiration
for this idea ceased as MacLyle began making urgent indications for him
to get into the hammock. He backed off warily, expostulating, trying to
convey to MacLyle that he only wondered, he just wanted to know; no,
_no_, he wasn’t tired, dammit; but MacLyle became so insistent that he
picked the psychiatrist up like a child sulking at bed-time and carried
him to the hammock. Any impulse to kick and quarrel was quenched by the
nature of this and all other hammocks to be intolerant of shifting
burdens, and by the proximity of the large window, which he now saw was
built leaning outward, enabling one to look out of the hammock straight
down a minimum of four hundred and eighty feet. So all right, he
concluded, if you say so. I’m sleepy.

So for the next two hours he lay in the hammock watching MacLyle putter
about the place, thinking more or less professional thoughts.

He doesn’t or can’t speak (he diagnosed): aphasia, motor. He doesn’t or
can’t understand speech: aphasia, sensory. He won’t or can’t read and
write: alexia. And what else?

He looked at all that art—if it _was_ art, and any that was, was art by
accident—and the gadgetry: the chuntering windmill outside, the
sash-weight door-closer. He let his eyes follow a length of clothes-line
dangling unobtrusively down the leaning center post to which his hammock
was fastened, and the pulley and fittings from which it hung, and its
extension clear across the ceiling to the back wall, and understood
finally that it would, when pulled, open two long, narrow horizontal
hatches for through ventilation. A small door behind the chenille led to
what he correctly surmised was a primitive powder room, built to
overhang the precipice, the most perfect no-plumbing solution for that
convenience he had ever seen.

He watched MacLyle putter. That was the only word for it, and his
actions were the best example of puttering he had ever seen. MacLyle
lifted, shifted, and put things down, backed off to judge, returned to
lay an approving hand on the thing he had moved. Net effect, nothing
tangible—yet one could not say there was no effect, because of the
intense satisfaction the man radiated. For minutes he would stand, head
cocked, smiling slightly, regarding the half-finished potter’s wheel,
then explode into activity, sawing, planing, drilling. He would add the
finished piece to the cranks and connecting rods already completed, pat
it as if it were an obedient child, and walk away, leaving the rest of
the job for some other time. With a woodrasp he carefully removed the
nose from one of his dried clay figures, and meticulously put on a new
one. Always there was this absorption in his own products and processes,
and the air of total reward in everything. And there was time, there
seemed to be time enough for everything, and always would be.

Here is a man, thought the fairly intelligent psychiatrist, in retreat,
but in a retreat the like of which my science has not yet described. For
observe: he has reacted toward the primitive in terms of supplying
himself with his needs by his own hands and by his own ingenuity, and
yet there is nothing primitive in those needs themselves. He works
constantly to achieve the comforts which his history has conditioned him
to in the past—electric lights, cross-ventilation, trouble-free waste
disposal. He exhibits a profound humility in the low rates he pays
himself for his labor: he is building a potter’s wheel apparently in
order to make his own cooking vessels, and, since wood is cheap and clay
free, his vessel can only cost him less than engine-turned aluminum by a
very low evaluation of his own efforts.

His skills are less than his energy (mused the psychiatrist). His
carpentry, like his painting and sculpture, shows considerable
intelligence, but only moderate training; he can construct but not
beautify, draw but not draft, and reach the artistically pleasing only
by not erasing the random shake, the accidental cut; so that real
creation in his work is, like any random effect, rare and unpredictable.
Therefore his reward is in the area of satisfaction—about as wide a
generalization as one can make.

What satisfaction? Not in possessions themselves, for this man could
have bought better for less. Not in excellence in itself, for he
obviously could be satisfied with less than perfection. Freedom,
perhaps, from routine, from dominations of work? Hardly, because for all
the complexity of this cluttered cottage, it had its order and its
system; the presence of an alarm clock conveyed a good deal in this
area. He wasn’t dominated by regularity—he used it. And his
satisfaction? Why, it must lie in this closed circle, himself to
himself, and in the very fact of non-communication!

Retreat … retreat. Retreat to savagery and you don’t engineer your
cross-ventilation or adjust a five-hundred-foot gravity flush for your
john. Retreat into infancy and you don’t design and build a potter’s
wheel. Retreat from people and you don’t greet a stranger like …

Wait.

Maybe a stranger who had something to communicate, or some way of
communication, wouldn’t be so welcome. An unsettling thought, that.
Running the risk of doing something MacLyle didn’t like would be,
possibly, a little more unselfish than the challenge warranted.

MacLyle began to cook.

Watching him, the psychiatrist reflected suddenly that this withdrawn
and wordless individual was a happy one, in his own matrix; further, he
had fulfilled all his obligations and responsibilities and was bothering
no one.

It was intolerable.

It was intolerable because it was a violation of the prime directive of
psychiatry—at least, of that school of psychiatry which he professed,
and he was not going to confuse himself by considerations of other,
less-tried theories—_It is the function of psychiatry to adjust the
aberrant to society, and to restore or increase his usefulness to it_.
To yield, to rationalize this man’s behavior as balance, would be to fly
in the face of science itself; for this particular psychiatry finds its
most successful approaches in the scientific method, and it is
unprofitable to debate whether or not it is or is not a science. To its
practitioner it is, and that’s that; it has to be. Operationally
speaking, what has been found true, even statistically, must be Truth,
and all other things, even Possible, kept the hell out of the tool-box.
No known Truth allowed a social entity to secede this way, and, for one,
this fairly intelligent psychiatrist was not going to give this—this
_suicide_ his blessing.

He must, then, find a way to communicate with MacLyle, and when he had
found it, he must communicate to him the error of his ways. Without
getting thrown over the cliff.

He became aware that MacLyle was looking at him, twinkling. He smiled
back before he knew what he was doing, and obeyed MacLyle’s beckoning
gesture. He eased himself out of the hammock and went to the workbench,
where a steaming stew was set out in earthenware bowls. The bowls stood
on large plates and were surrounded by a band of carefully sliced
tomatoes. He tasted them. They were obviously vine-ripened and had been
speckled with a dark-green paste which, after studious attention to its
aftertaste, he identified as fresh basil mashed with fresh garlic and
salt. The effect was symphonic.

He followed suit when MacLyle picked up his own bowl and they went
outside and squatted under the old Engelmann spruce to eat. It was a
quiet and pleasant occasion, and during it the psychiatrist had plenty
of opportunity to size up his man and plan his campaign. He was quite
sure now how to proceed, and all he needed was opportunity, which
presented itself when MacLyle rose, stretched, smiled, and went indoors.
The psychiatrist followed him to the door and saw him crawl into the
hammock and fall almost instantly asleep.

The psychiatrist went to his car and got out his bag of tricks. And so
it was that late in the afternoon, when MacLyle emerged stretching and
yawning from his nap, he found his visitor under the spruce tree,
hefting the ophicleide and twiddling its keys in a perplexed and
investigatory fashion. MacLyle strode over to him and lifted the
ophicleide away with a pleasant I’ll-show-you smile, got the monstrous
contraption into position, and ran his tongue around the inside of the
mouthpiece, large as a demitasse. He had barely time to pucker up his
lips at the strange taste there before his irises rolled up completely
out of sight and he collapsed like a grounded parachute. The
psychiatrist was able only to snatch away the ophicleide in time to keep
the mouthpiece from knocking out MacLyle’s front teeth.

He set the ophicleide carefully against the tree and straightened
MacLyle’s limbs. He concentrated for a moment on the pulse, and turned
the head to one side so saliva would not drain down the flaccid throat,
and then went back to his bag of tricks. He came back and knelt, and
MacLyle did not even twitch at the bite of the hypodermics: a careful
blend of the non-soporific tranquilizers Frenquel, chlorpromazine and
Reserpine, and a judicious dose of scopolamine, a hypnotic.

The psychiatrist got water and carefully sponged out the man’s mouth,
not caring to wait out another collapse the next time he swallowed. Then
there was nothing to do but wait, and plan.

Exactly on schedule, according to the psychiatrist’s wristwatch, MacLyle
groaned and coughed weakly. The psychiatrist immediately and in a firm
quiet voice told him not to move. Also not to think. He stayed out of
the immediate range of MacLyle’s unfocused eyes and explained that
MacLyle must trust him, because he was there to help, and not to worry
about feeling mixed-up or disoriented. “You don’t know where you are or
how you got here,” he informed MacLyle. He also told MacLyle, who was
past forty, that he was thirty-seven years old, but he knew what he was
doing.

MacLyle just lay there obediently and thought these things over and
waited for more information. He knew he must trust this voice, the owner
of which was here to help him; that he was thirty-seven years old; and
his name. In these things he lay and marinated. The drugs kept him
conscious, docile, submissive and without guile. The psychiatrist
observed and exulted: oh you azacyclonol, he chanted silently to
himself, you pretty piperidyl, handsome hydrochloride, subtle
Serpasil … Confidently he left MacLyle and went into the cabin where,
after due search, he found some decent clothes and some socks and shoes
and brought them out and wrapped the supine patient in them. He helped
MacLyle across the clearing and into his car, humming as he did so, for
there is none so happy as an expert faced with excellence in his
specialty. MacLyle sank back into the cushions and gave one wondering
glance at the cabin and at the blare of late light from the bell of the
ophicleide; but the psychiatrist told him firmly that these things had
nothing to do with him, nothing at all, and MacLyle smiled relievedly
and fell to watching the scenery. As they passed the general store
MacLyle stirred, but said nothing about it. Instead he asked the
psychiatrist if the Ardsmere station was open yet, whereupon the
psychiatrist could barely answer him for the impulse to purr like a cat:
the Ardsmere station, two stops before MacLyle’s suburban town, had
burned down and been rebuilt almost six years ago; so now he knew for
sure that MacLyle was living in a time preceding his difficulties—a time
during which, of course, MacLyle had been able to talk. All of this the
psychiatrist kept to himself, and answered gravely that yes, they had
the Ardsmere station operating again. And did he have anything else on
his mind?

MacLyle considered this carefully, but since all the immediate questions
were answered—unswervingly, he _knew_ he was safe in the hands of this
man, whoever he was; he knew (he thought) his correct age and that he
was expected to feel disoriented; he was also under a command not to
think—he placidly shook his head and went back to watching the road
unroll under their wheels. “Fallen Rock Zone,” he murmured as they
passed a sign. The psychiatrist drove happily down the mountain and
across the flats, back to the city where he had hired the car. He left
it at the railroad station (“Rail Crossing Road,” murmured MacLyle) and
made reservations for a compartment on the train, aircraft being too
open and public for his purposes and far too fast for the hourly rate he
suddenly decided to apply.

They had time for a silent and companionable dinner before train time,
and then at last they were aboard.

The psychiatrist turned off all but one reading lamp and leaned forward.
MacLyle’s eyes dilated readily to the dimmer light, and the psychiatrist
leaned back comfortably and asked him how he felt. He felt fine and said
so. The psychiatrist asked him how old he was and MacLyle told him,
thirty-seven, but he sounded doubtful.

Knowing that the scopolamine was wearing off but the other drugs, the
tranquilizers, would hang on for a bit, the psychiatrist drew a deep
breath and removed the suggestion; he told MacLyle the truth about his
age, and brought him up to the here and now. MacLyle just looked puzzled
for a few minutes and then his features settled into an expression that
can only be described as not unhappy. “Porter,” was all he said, gazing
at the push-button, and announced that he could read now.

The psychiatrist nodded sagely and offered no comment, being quite
willing to let a patient stew as long as he produced essence.

MacLyle abruptly demanded to know why he had lost the powers of speech
and reading. The psychiatrist raised his eyebrows a little, smiled one
of those “You-tell-me” smiles, and then got up and suggested they sleep
on it. He got the porter in to fix the beds and as an afterthought told
the man to come back with the evening papers. Nothing can orient a
cultural expatriate better than the evening papers. The man did. MacLyle
paid no attention to this, one way or the other. He just climbed into
the psychiatrist’s spare pajamas thoughtfully and they went to bed.

The psychiatrist didn’t know if MacLyle had awakened him on purpose or
whether the train’s slowing had done it, anyway he awoke about 3:00 in
the morning to find MacLyle standing beside his bunk looking at him
fixedly. He noticed, too, that MacLyle’s reading lamp was lit and the
papers were scattered all over the floor. MacLyle said, “You’re some
kind of a doctor,” in a flat voice.

The psychiatrist admitted it.

MacLyle said, “Well, this ought to make some sense to you. I was skiing
out here years ago when I was a college kid. Accident, fellow I was with
broke his leg. Compound. Made him comfortable as I could and went for
help. Came back, he’d slid down the mountain, thrashing around, I guess.
Crevasse, down in the bottom; took two days to find him, three days to
get him out. Frostbite. Gangrene.”

The psychiatrist tried to look as if he was following this.

MacLyle said, “The one thing I always remember, him pulling back the
bandages all the time to look at his leg. Knew it was gone, couldn’t
keep himself from watching the stuff spread around and upward. Didn’t
like to; _had_ to. Tried to stop him, finally had to help him or he’d
hurt himself. Every ten, fifteen minutes all the way down to the lodge,
fifteen hours, looking under the bandages.”

The psychiatrist tried to think of something to say and couldn’t.

MacLyle said, “That Donne, that John Donne I used to spout, I always
believed that.”

The psychiatrist began to misquote the thing about send not to ask for
whom the bell …

“Yeah, that, but especially ‘_any man’s death diminishes me, because I
am involved in mankind.’_ I believed that,” MacLyle repeated. “I
believed more than that. Not only death. Damn foolishness diminishes me
because I am involved. People all the time pushing people around
diminishes me. Everybody hungry for a fast buck diminishes me.” He
picked up a sheet of newspaper and let it slip away; it flapped off to
the corner of the compartment like a huge gravemoth. “I was getting
diminished to death and I had to watch it happening to me like that kid
with the gangrene, so that’s why.” The train, crawling now, lurched
suddenly and yielded. MacLyle’s eyes flicked to the window, where neon
beer signs and a traffic light were reluctantly being framed. MacLyle
leaned close to the psychiatrist. “I just had to get un-involved with
mankind before I got diminished altogether, everything mankind did was
my fault. So I did and now here I am involved again.” MacLyle abruptly
went to the door. “And for that, thanks.”

The psychiatrist asked him what he was going to do.

“Do?” asked MacLyle cheerfully. “Why, I’m going out there and diminish
mankind right back.” He was out in the corridor with the door closed
before the psychiatrist so much as sat up. He banged it open again and
leaned in. He said in the sanest of all possible voices, “Now mind you,
doctor, this is only one man’s opinion,” and was gone. He killed four
people before they got him.



THE GIRL HAD GUTS


THE CABBY WOULDN’T TAKE THE FARE (“Me take a nickel from Captain Gargan?
Not in this life!”) and the doorman welcomed me so warmly I almost
forgave Sue for moving into a place that had a doorman. And then the
elevator and then Sue. You have to be away a long time, a long way, to
miss someone like that, and me, I’d been farther away than anyone ought
to be for too long plus six weeks. I kissed her and squeezed her until
she yelled for mercy, and when I got to where I realized she was yelling
we were clear back to the terrace, the whole length of the apartment
away from the door. I guess I was sort of enthusiastic, but as I
said … oh, who can say a thing like that and make any sense? I was glad
to see my wife, and that was it.

She finally got me quieted down and my uniform jacket and shoes off and
a dish of ale in my fist, and there I lay in the relaxer looking at her
just the way I used to when I could come home from the base every night,
just the way I’d dreamed every off-duty minute since we blasted off all
those months ago. Special message to anyone who’s never been off Earth:
Look around you. Take a good _long_ look around. You’re in the best
place there is. A fine place.

I said as much to Sue, and she laughed and said, “Even the last six
weeks?” and I said, “I don’t want to insult you, baby, but yes: even
those six weeks in lousy quarantine at the lousy base hospital were
good, compared to being anyplace else. But it was the longest six weeks
I ever spent; I’ll give you that.” I pulled her down on top of me and
kissed her again. “It was longer than twice the rest of the trip.”

She struggled loose and patted me on the head the way I don’t like. “Was
it so bad really?”

“It was bad. It was lonesome and dangerous and—and disgusting, I guess
is the best word for it.”

“You mean the plague.”

I snorted. “It wasn’t a plague.”

“Well, I wouldn’t know,” she said. “Just rumors. That thing of you
recalling the crew after twelve hours of liberty, for six weeks of
quarantine …”

“Yeah, I guess that would start rumors.” I closed my eyes and laughed
grimly. “Let ’em rumor. No one could dream up anything uglier than the
truth. Give me another bucket of suds.”

She did, and I kissed her hand as she passed it over. She took the hand
right away and I laughed at her. “Scared of me or something?”

“Oh lord no. Just … wanting to catch up. So much you’ve done, millions
of miles, months and months … and all I know is you’re back, and nothing
else.”

“I brought the Demon Lover back safe and sound,” I kidded.

She colored up. “Don’t talk like that.” The Demon Lover was my Second,
name of Purcell. Purcell was one of those guys who just has to go around
making like a bull moose in fly-time, bellowing at the moon and banging
his antlers against the rocks. He’d been to the house a couple or three
times and said things about Sue that were so appreciative that I had to
tell him to knock it off or he’d collect a punch in the mouth. Sue had
liked him, though; well, Sue was always that way, always going a bit out
of her way to get upwind of an animal like that. And I guess I’m one of
’em myself; anyway, it was me she married. I said, “I’m afraid ol’
Purcell’s either a blowhard or he was just out of character when we
rounded up the crew and brought ’em all back. We found ’em in
honky-tonks and strip joints; we found ’em in the buzzoms of their
families behaving like normal family men do after a long trip; but
Purcell, we found him at the King George Hotel”—I emphasized with a
forefinger—“alone by himself and fast asleep, where he tells us he went
as soon as he got earthside. Said he wanted a soak in a hot tub and
twenty-four hours sleep in a real I-G bed with sheets. How’s that for a
sailor ashore on his first leave?”

She’d gotten up to get me more ale. “I haven’t finished this one yet!” I
said.

She said ‘oh’ and sat down again. “You were going to tell me about the
trip.”

“I was? Oh, all right, I was. But listen carefully, because this is one
trip I’m going to forget as fast as I can, and I’m not going to do it
again, even in my head.”

I don’t have to tell you about blastoff—that it’s more like driftoff
these days, since all long hops start from Outer Orbit satellites, out
past the Moon—or about the flicker-field by which we hop faster than
light, get dizzier than a five-year-old on a drug store stool, and
develop more morning-sickness than Mom. That I’ve told you before.

So I’ll start with planetfall on Mullygantz II, Terra’s best bet to date
for a colonial planet, five-nines Earth Normal (that is, .99999) and
just about as handsome a rock as ever circled a sun. We hung the blister
in stable orbit and Purcell and I dropped down in a super-scout with
supplies and equipment for the ecological survey station. We expected to
find things humming there, five busy people and a sheaf of completed
reports, and we hoped we’d be the ones to take back the news that the
next ship would be the colony ship. We found three dead and two sick,
and knew right away that the news we’d be taking back was going to stop
the colonists in their tracks.

Clement was the only one I’d known personally. Head of the station,
physicist and ecologist both, and tops both ways, and he was one of the
dead. Joe and Katherine Flent were dead. Amy Segal, the recorder—one of
the best in Pioneer Service—was sick in a way I’ll go into in a minute,
and Glenda Spooner, the plant biologist, was—well, call it withdrawn.
Retreated. Something had scared her so badly that she could only sit
with her arms folded and her legs crossed and her eyes wide open,
rocking and watching.

Anyone gets to striking hero medals ought to make a platter-sized one
for Amy Segal. Like I said, she was sick. Her body temperature was
wildly erratic, going from 102 all the way down to 96 and back up again.
She was just this side of breakdown and must have been like that for
weeks, slipping across the line for minutes at a time, hauling herself
back for a moment or two, then sliding across again. But she knew Glenda
was helpless, though physically in perfect shape, and she knew that even
automatic machinery has to be watched. She not only dragged herself
around keeping ink in the recording pens and new charts when the
seismo’s and hygro’s and airsonde recorders needed them, but she kept
Glenda fed; more than that, she fed herself.

She fed herself _close to fifteen thousand calories a day_. And she was
forty pounds underweight. She was the weirdest sight you ever saw, her
face full like a fat person’s but her abdomen, from the lower ribs to
the pubes, collapsed almost against her spine. You’d never have believed
an organism could require so much food—not, that is, until you saw her
eat. She’d rigged up a chopper out of the lab equipment because she
actually couldn’t wait to chew her food. She just dumped everything and
anything edible into that gadget and propped her chin on the edge of the
table by the outlet, and packed that garbage into her open mouth with
both hands. If she could have slept it would have been easier but hunger
would wake her after twenty minutes or so and back she’d go, chop and
cram, guzzle and swill. If Glenda had been able to help—but there she
was, she did it all herself, and when we got the whole story straight we
found she’d been at it for nearly three weeks. In another three weeks
they’d have been close to the end of their stores, enough for five
people for anyway another couple of months.

We had a portable hypno in the first-aid kit on the scout, and we
slapped it to Glenda Spooner with a reassurance tape and a normal sleep
command, and just put her to bed with it. We bedded Amy down too, though
she got a bit hysterical until we could make her understand through that
fog of delirium that one of us would stand by every minute with
premasticated rations. Once she understood that she slept like a corpse,
but such a corpse you never want to see, lying there eating.

It was a lot of work all at once, and when we had it done Purcell wiped
his face and said, “Five-nines Earth Normal, hah. No malignant virus or
bacterium. No toxic plants or fungi. Come to Mullygantz II, land of
happiness and health.”

“Nobody’s used that big fat _no_,” I reminded him. “The reports only say
there’s nothing bad here that we know about or can test for. My God, the
best brains in the world used to kill AB patients by transfusing type O
blood. Heaven help us the day we think we know everything that goes on
in the universe.”

We didn’t get the whole story then; rather, it was all there but not in
a comprehensible order. The key to it all was Amy Segal’s personal log,
which she called a “diary”, and kept in hen tracks called shorthand,
which took three historians and a philologist a week to decode after we
returned to Earth. It was the diary that fleshed the thing out for us,
told us about these people and their guts and how they exploded all over
each other. So I’ll tell it, not the way we got it, but the way it
happened.

To begin with it was a good team. Clement was a good head, one of those
relaxed guys who always listens to other people talking. He could get a
fantastic amount of work out of a team and out of himself too, and it
never showed. His kind of drive is sort of a secret weapon.

Glenda Spooner and Amy Segal were wild about him in a warm respectful
way that never interfered with the work. I’d guess that Glenda was more
worshipful about it, or at least, with her it showed more. Amy was the
little mouse with the big eyes that gets happier and stays just as quiet
when her grand passion walks into the room, except maybe she works a
little harder so he’ll be pleased. Clement was bed-friends with both of
them, which is the way things usually arrange themselves when there’s an
odd number of singles on a team. It’s expected of them, and the wise
exec keeps it going that way and plays no favorites, at least till the
job’s done.

The Flents, Katherine and Joe, were married, and had been for quite a
while before they went Outside. His specialty was geology and mineralogy
and she was a chemist, and just as their sciences supplemented each
other so did their egos. One of Amy’s early “diary” entries says they
knew each other so well they were one step away from telepathy; they’d
work side by side for hours swapping information with grunts and
eyebrows.

Just what kicked over all this stability it’s hard to say. It wasn’t a
fine balance; you’d think from the look of things that the arrangement
could stand a lot of bumps and friction. Probably it was an unlucky
combination of small things all harmless in themselves, but having a
critical-mass characteristic that nobody knew about. Maybe it was
Clement’s sick spell that triggered it; maybe the Flents suddenly went
into one of those oh-God-what-did-I-ever-see-in-you-phases that come
over married people who are never separated; maybe it was Amy’s sudden
crazy yen for Joe Flent and her confusion over it. Probably the worst
thing of all was that Joe Flent might have sensed how she felt and
caught fire too. I don’t know. I guess, like I said, that they all
happened at once.

Clement getting sick like that. He was out after bio specimens and
spotted a primate. They’re fairly rare on Mullygantz II, big ugly devils
maybe five feet tall but so fat they outweigh a man two to one. They’re
mottled pink and gray, and hairless, and they have a face that looks
like an angry gorilla when it’s relaxed, and a ridiculous row of little
pointed teeth instead of fangs. They get around pretty good in the trees
but they’re easy to outrun on the ground, because they never learned to
use their arms and knuckles like the great apes, but waddle over the
ground with their arms held up in the air to get them out of the way. It
fools you. They look so damn silly that you forget they might be
dangerous.

So anyway, Clement surprised one on the ground and had it headed for the
open fields before it knew what was happening. He ran it to a
standstill, just by getting between it and the trees and then
approaching it. The primate did all the running; Clement just maneuvered
it until it was totally pooped and squatted down to wait its doom.
Actually all the doom it would have gotten from Clement was to get
stunned, hypoed, examined and turned loose, but of course it had no way
of knowing that. It just sat there in the grass looking stupid and
ludicrous and harmless in an ugly sort of way, and when Clement put out
his hand it didn’t move, and when he patted it on the neck it just
trembled. He was slowly withdrawing his hand to get his stun gun out
when he said something or laughed—anyway, made a sound, and the thing
bit him.

Those little bitty teeth weren’t what they seemed. The gums are
retractile and the teeth are really not teeth at all but serrated bone
with all those little needles slanting inward like a shark’s. The jaw
muscles are pretty flabby, fortunately, or he’d have lost an elbow, but
all the same, it was a bad bite. Clement couldn’t get loose, and he
couldn’t reach around himself to get to the stun gun, so he drew his
flame pistol, thumbed it around to “low”, and scorched the primate’s
throat with it. That was Clement, never wanting to do any more damage
than he had to. The primate opened its mouth to protect its throat and
Clement got free. He jumped back and twisted his foot and fell, and
something burned him on the side of the face like a lick of hellfire. He
scrabbled back out of the way and got to his feet. The primate was
galloping for the woods on its stumpy little legs with its long arms up
over its head—even then Clement thought it was funny. Then something
else went for him in the long grass and he took a big leap out of its
way.

He later wrote very careful notes on this thing. It was wet and it was
nasty and it stunk beyond words. He said you could search your memory
long afterwards and locate separate smells in that overall stench the
way you can with the instruments of an orchestra. There was butyl
mercaptan and rotten celery, excrement, formic acid, decayed meat and
that certain smell which is like the taste of some brasses. The burn on
his cheek smelt like hydrochloric acid at work on a hydrocarbon; just
what it was.

The thing was irregularly spherical or ovoid, but soft and squashy.
Fluids of various kinds oozed from it here and there—colorless and
watery, clotted yellow like soft-boiled eggs, and blood. It bled more
than anything ought to that needs blood; it bled in gouts from openings
at random, and it bled cutaneously, droplets forming on its surface like
the sweat on a glass of ice water. Cutaneously, did I say? That’s not
what Clement reported. It looked skinless—flayed was the word he used.
Much of its surface was striated muscle fiber, apparently unprotected.
In two places that he could see was naked brown tissue like liver,
drooling and dripping excretions of its own.

And this thing, roughly a foot and a half by two feet and weighing maybe
thirty pounds, was flopping and hopping in a spastic fashion, not caring
which side was up (if it had an up) but always moving toward him.

Clement blew sharply out of his nostrils and stepped back and to one
side—a good long step, with the agony of his scalded cheek to remind him
that wherever the thing had come from, it was high up, and he didn’t
want it taking off like that again.

And when he turned like that, so did the thing, leaving behind it a
trail of slime and blood in the beaten grass, a curved filthy spoor to
show him it knew him and wanted him.

He confesses he does not remember dialing up the flame pistol, or the
first squeeze of the release. He does remember circling the thing and
pouring fire on it while it squirmed and squirted, and while he yelled
sounds that were not words, until he and his weapon were spent and there
was nothing where the thing had been but a charred wetness adding the
smell of burned fat to all the others. He says in his unsparing report
that he tramped around and around the thing, stamping out the grass fire
he had started, and shaking with revulsion, and that he squatted weakly
in the grass weeping from reaction, and that only then did he think of
his wounds. He broke out his pioneer’s spectral salve and smeared it
liberally on burns and bite both. He hunkered there until the analgesic
took the pain away and he felt confident that the wide array of
spansuled antibiotics was at work, and then he roused himself and
slogged back to the base.

And to that sickness. It lasted only eight days or so, and wasn’t the
kind of sickness that ought to follow such an experience. His arm and
his face healed well and quickly, his appetite was very good but not
excessive, and his mind seemed clear enough. But during that time, as he
put it in the careful notes he taped on the voicewriter, he felt things
he had never felt before and could hardly describe. They were all things
he had heard about or read about, foreign to him personally. There were
faint shooting pains in his abdomen and back, a sense of pulse where no
pulse should be—like that in a knitting bone, but beating in his soft
tissues. None of it was beyond bearing. He had a constant black
diarrhea, but like the pains it never passed the nuisance stage. One
vague thing he said about four times: that when he woke up in the
morning he felt that he was in some way different from what he had been
the night before, and he couldn’t say how. Just … different.

And in time it faded away and he felt normal again. That was the whole
damned thing about what had happened—he was a very resourceful guy,
Clement was, and if he’d been gigged just a little more by this he’d
have laid his ears back and worked until he knew what the trouble was.
But he wasn’t pushed into it that way, and it didn’t keep him from doing
his usual man-and-a-half’s hard work each day. To the others he was
unusually quiet, but if they noticed it at all it wasn’t enough to
remark about. They were all working hard too, don’t forget. Clement
slept alone these eight or nine days, and this wasn’t remarkable either,
only a little unusual, and not worth comment to either Glenda or Amy,
who were satisfied, secure, and fully-occupied women.

But then, here again was that rotten timing, small things on small
things. This had to be the time of poor Amy Segal’s trouble. It started
over nothing at all, in the chem lab where she was doing the
hurry-up-and-wait routine of a lengthy titration. Joe Flent came in to
see how it was going, pass the time of day, do a little something here,
something there with the equipment. He had to move along the bench just
where Amy was standing, and, absorbed in what he was doing, he put out
his hand to gesture her back, and went on with what he was doing. But—

She wrote it in her diary, in longhand, a big scrawl of it in the middle
of those neat little glyphs of hers: “He _touched_ me.” All underlined
and everything. All right, it was a nothing: I said that. It was an
accident. But the accident had jarred her and she was made of fulminate
of mercury all of a sudden. She stood where she was and let him press
close to her, going on with his work, and she almost fainted. What makes
these things happen …? Never mind; the thing happened. She looked at him
as if she had never seen him before, the light on his hair, the shape of
his ears and his jaw, the—well, all like that. Maybe she made a sound
and maybe Joe Flent just sensed it, but he turned around and there they
were, staring at each other in some sort of mutual hypnosis with God
knows what flowing back and forth between them. Then Joe gave a funny
little surprised grunt and did not walk, but ran out of there.

That doesn’t sound like anything at all, does it? Whatever it was,
though, it was enough to throw little Amy Segal into a flat spin of the
second order, and pop her gimbal bearings. I’ve read that there used to
be a lot of stress and strain between people about this business of sex.
Well, we’ve pretty well cleared that up, in the way we humans generally
clear things up, by being extreme about it. If you’re single you’re
absolutely free. If you’re married you’re absolutely bound. If you’re
married and you get an external itch, you have your free choice—you stay
married and don’t scratch it, or you scuttle the marriage and you do
scratch it. If you’re single you respect the marriage bond just like
anyone else; you don’t, but I mean you _don’t_ go holing somebody else’s
hull.

All of which hardly needs saying, especially not to Amy Segal. But like
a lot of fine fools before her, she was all mixed up with what she felt
and what she thought she should feel. Maybe she’s a throwback to the
primitive, when everybody’s concave was fair game to anyone else’s
convex. Whatever it was about her, it took the form of making her hate
herself. She was walking around among those other people thinking, ‘I’m
no good, Joe’s married and look at me, I guess I don’t _care_ he’s
married. What’s the matter with me, how could I feel this way about Joe,
I must be a monster, I don’t deserve to be here among decent people.’
And so on. And no one to tell it to. Maybe if Clement hadn’t been sick,
or maybe if she’d had it in her to confide in one of the other women, or
maybe—well, hell with maybes. She was half-blind with misery.

Reading the diary transcript later I wished I could put time back and
space too and tap her on the shoulder and say ‘come along, little girl,’
and then put her in a corner and say ‘listen, knothead, get untied, will
you? You got a yen, never mind, it’ll pass. But as long as it lasts
don’t be ashamed of it.’ Damn it, that’s all she needed, just a word
like that.…

Then Clement was well again and one night gave her the sign, and she
jumped at it, and that was the most miserable thing of all, because
after it was over she burst into tears and told him it was the last
time, never again. He must’ve been no end startled. He missed the ferry
there. He could’ve got the whole story if he’d tried, but he didn’t.
Maybe … maybe he was a little changed from what happened to him, after
all. Anyway, poor Amy hit the bottom of the tank about then. She
scribbled yards about it in her book. She’d just found out she responded
to Clement just like always, and that proved to her that she couldn’t
love Joe after all, therefore her love wasn’t real, therefore she wasn’t
worth loving, therefore Joe would never love her. Little bubblehead! And
the only way out she could see was to force herself to be faithful to
somebody, so she was going to “purify her feelings”—that’s what she
wrote—by being faithful to Joe, hence no more Clement and of course no
Joe. And with that decision she put her ductless glands in a grand
alliance with her insanity. Would you believe that anyone in this day
and age could have such a pot boiling inside a fuzzy skull?

From that moment on Amy Segal was under forced draft. Apparently no one
said anything about it, but you just don’t build up incandescence in
small dark places without somebody noticing. Katherine Flent must have
tumbled early, as women do, and probably said nothing about it, as some
women sometimes don’t. Ultimately Joe Flent saw it, and what he went
through nobody will ever know. I know he saw it, and felt it, because of
what happened. Oh my God, what happened!

It must have been about now that Amy got the same strange
almost-sickness Clement had gone through. Vague throbbings and shiftings
in the abdomen, and the drizzles, and again that weird thing about
feeling different in the morning and not knowing why. And when she was
about halfway through the eight-day siege, damn if Glenda Spooner
doesn’t seem to come down with it. Clement did the reporting on this; he
was seeing a lot more of Glenda these days and could watch it. He
noticed the similarity with his own illness all right, though it wasn’t
as noticeable, and called all hands for a report. Amy, possibly Glenda,
and Clement had it and could pass it; the Flents never showed the signs.
Clement decided finally that it was just one of those things that people
get and no one knows why, like the common cold before Billipp discovered
it was an allergy to a gluten fraction. And the fact that Glenda Spooner
had had such a slight attack opened the possibility that one or both
Flents had had it and never known it—and that’s something else we’ll
never know for sure.

Well, one fine day Clement headed out to quarter the shale hills to the
north, looking for petroleum if he could find it and anything else if he
couldn’t. Clement was a fine observer. Trouble with Clement, he was an
ecologist, which is mostly a biologist, and biologists are crazy.

The fine day, about three hours after he left, sprung a leak, and the
bottom dropped out of the sky—which didn’t worry anyone because everyone
knew it wouldn’t worry Clement.

Only he didn’t come back.

That was a long night at the base. Twice searchers started out but they
turned back in the first two hundred yards. Rain can come down like that
if it wants to, but it shouldn’t keep it up for so long. Morning didn’t
stop it, but as soon as it was dark gray outside instead of total black,
the Flents and the two girls dropped everything and headed for the
hills. Amy and Glenda went to the west and separated and searched the
ridge until mid-afternoon, so it was all over by the time they got back.
The Flents took the north and east, and it was Joe who found Clement.

That crazy Clement, he’d seen a bird’s nest. He saw it because it was
raining and because the fish-head stork always roosts in the rain; if it
didn’t its goofy glued-together nest would come unstuck. It’s a big
bird, larger than a terran stork, snow-white, wide-winged and easy to
see, especially against a black shale bluff. Clement wanted a good look
at how it sheltered its nest, which looks like half a pinecone as big as
half a barrel—you’d think too big for the bird to keep dry. So up he
went—and discovered that the fish-head stork’s thick floppy neck
conceals three, maybe four S-curves underneath all that loose skin. He
was all of nine feet away from the nest, clinging to the crumbly rock
wall, when he discovered it, the hard way. The stork’s head shot out
like a battering ram and caught him right on the breastbone, and down he
went, and I guess that waterlogged shale was waiting just for this,
because he started a really good rock-slide. He broke his leg and was
buried up to the shoulder blades. He was facing up the cliff, with the
rain beating down on him almost enough to tear his eyelids. He had
nothing to look at except the underside of the nest, which his
rock-slide had exposed, and I imagine he looked at it until he
understood, much against his will, that the nest was all that was
holding up more loosened rock above it; and he put in the night that
way, waiting for seepage to loosen the gunk that stuck the nest up there
and send those tons of rock smack in his face. The leg was pretty bad
and he probably passed out two or three times, but never long enough to
suit him … _damn_ it! I got a list this long of people who ought to have
things like that happen to them. So it has to happen to Clement.

It was still raining in the morning when Joe Flent found him. Joe let
out a roar westward where his wife was combing the rocks, but didn’t
wait to see if she’d heard. If she didn’t, maybe there was a sort of
telepathy between them like Amy said in her diary. Anyway, she arrived
just in time to see it happen, but not in time to do anything about it.

She saw Joe bending over Clement’s head and shoulders where they stuck
out of the rock pile, and then she heard a short, sharp shout. It must
have been Clement who shouted; he was facing uphill and could see it
coming, nest and all. Katherine screamed and ran toward them, and then
the new slide reached the bottom, and that was that for Clement.

But not for Joe. Something else got Joe.

It seemed to explode out of the rocks a split second before the slide
hit. It took Joe Flent in the chest so hard it lifted him right off his
feet and flung him down and away from the slide. Katherine screamed
again as she ran, because the thing that had knocked Joe down was
bouncing up and down in a crazy irregular hop, each one taking it closer
to Joe as he lay on his back half-stunned, and she recognized it for the
thing that had attacked Clement the day the primate bit him.

She logged this report on the voicewriter and I heard the tape, and I
wish they’d transcribe it and then destroy it. Nobody should hear a
duty-bound horror-struck soul like that tell such a story. Read it,
okay. But that torn-up monotone, oh God. She was having nine agonies at
once, what with her hands all gone and what happened to Joe out there,
and what he’d said … arrgh! I can’t tell it without hearing it in my
head.

Well. That stinking horror hopped up on Joe and he half sat up and it
hopped again and landed right over his face and slumped there quivering,
bleeding and streaming rain and acid. Joe flipped so hard his feet went
straight up in the air and he seemed to hang there, standing on the back
of his head and his shoulder-blades with his arms and legs doing a crazy
jumping-jack flailing. Then he fell again with the monstrosity snugger
than ever over his face and neck and head, and he squirmed once and then
lay still, and that was when Katherine got to him.

Katherine went at that thing with her bare hands. One half-second
contact, even in all that rain, was enough to pucker and shrivel her
skin, and it must have felt like plunging her hands into smoking deep
fat. She didn’t say what it felt like. She only said that when she
grabbed at the thing to tear it away from Joe’s face, it came apart in
small slippery handfuls. She kicked at it and her foot went in and
through it and it spilled ropy guts and gouted blood. She tore into it
again, clawing and batting it away, and that was probably when she did
the most damage to her hands. Then she had an idea from somewhere in
that nightmare, fell back and took Joe’s feet and dragged him twenty
feet away—don’t ask me how—and turned him over on his face so the last
of that mess dropped off him. She skinned out of her shirt and knelt
down and rolled him over and sat him up. She tried to wipe his face with
the shirt but found she couldn’t hold it, so she scooped her ruined hand
under it and brought it up and mopped, but what she mopped at wasn’t a
face any more. On the tape she said, in that flat shredded voice, “I
didn’t realize that for a while.”

She put her arms around Joe and rocked him and said, “Joey, it’s
Katherine, it’s all right, honey. Katherine’s here.” He sighed once, a
long shuddering sigh and straightened his back, and a hole bigger than a
mouth opened up in the front of his head. He said, “Amy? Amy?” and
suddenly fought Katherine blindly. She lost her balance and her arm fell
away from his back, and he went down. He made one great cry that raised
echoes all up and down the ridge: “A … meeeee …” and in a minute or two
he was dead.

Katherine sat there until she was ready to go, and covered his face with
the shirt. She looked once at the thing that had killed him. It was
dead, scattered in slimy bits all over the edge of the rock fall. She
went back to the base. She didn’t remember the trip. She must have been
soaked and chilled to the bone marrow. She apparently went straight to
the voicewriter and reported in and then just sat there, three, four
hours until the others got back.

Now if only somebody had been there to … I don’t know. Maybe she
couldn’t have listened, after all that. Who knows what went on in her
head while she sat there letting her blood run out of her hands on to
the floor? I’d guess it was that last cry of Joe’s, because of what
happened when Glenda and Amy came in. It might have been so loud in her
head that nobody else’s voice could get in. But I still wish somebody
had been there, somebody who knows about the things people say when they
die. Sometimes they’re already dead when they say those things; they
don’t mean anything. I saw an engineer get it when a generator threw a
segment. He just said “Three-eighths … three-eighths …” What I’m trying
to say, it didn’t have to mean anything.… Well, what’s the difference
now?

They came in dripping and tired, calling out. Katherine Flent didn’t
answer. They came into the recording shack, Amy first. Amy was half
across the floor before she saw Katherine. Glenda was still in the
doorway. Amy screamed, and I guess anyone would, seeing Katherine with
her hair plastered around her face the way it had dried, and blood all
over her clothes and the floor, and no shirt. She fixed her crazy eyes
on Amy and got up slowly. Amy called her name twice but Katherine kept
on moving, slow, steady, evenly. Between the heels of her ruined hands
she held a skinning knife. She probably couldn’t have held it tightly
enough to do any damage, but I guess that didn’t occur to Amy.

Amy stepped back toward the door and with one long step Katherine headed
her off and herded her toward the other corner, where there was no way
out. Amy glanced behind her, saw the trap, covered her face with her
hands, stepped back, dropped her hands. “Katherine!” she screamed. “What
is it? What is it? Did you find Clement? Quick!” she rapped at Glenda,
who stood frozen in the doorway. “Get Joe.”

At the sound of Joe’s name Katherine moaned softly and leaped. She was
met in mid-air by the same kind of thing that had killed her husband.

The soft horror caught Katherine off the floor in mid-leap and hurled
her backward. Her head hit the corner of a steel relay-rack …

The stench in the small room was quite beyond description, beyond
bearing. Amy staggered to the door, pushing an unresisting Glenda ahead
of her.…

And there they were as we found them, Purcell and me: one fevered freak
that could out-eat six men, and one catatonic.

I sent Purcell out to the shale hill to see if there was enough left of
Clement and Joe Flent for an examination. There wasn’t. Animals had
scattered Joe’s remains pretty thoroughly, and Purcell couldn’t find
Clement at all, though he moved the rocks till his hands bled. There had
probably been more slides after that rain. Somehow, in those weeks when
she maintained the basic instrumentation single-handed, Amy Segal had
managed to drag Katherine out and bury her, and clean up the recording
room, though nothing but burning would ever get all that smell out of
it.

We left everything but the tapes and records. The scout was built for
two men and cargo, and getting off the ground with four wasn’t easy. I
was mighty glad to get back on the bridge of the flicker-ship and away
from that five-nines hell. We stashed the two girls in a cabin next to
the sick bay and quarantined them, just in case, and I went to work on
the records, getting the story in about the order I’ve given it here.

And once I had it, there wasn’t a thing I could do with it. Amy was at
all times delirious, or asleep or eating; you could get very little from
her, and even then you couldn’t trust what you got. From Glenda you got
nothing. She just lay still with that pleasant half-smile on her face
and let the universe proceed without her. On a ship like ours we are the
medical division, the skipper and the officers, and we could do nothing
for these two but keep them fed and comfortable; otherwise, we mostly
forgot they were aboard. Which was an error.

Status quo, then, as far as I knew, from the time we left the planet
until we made earthfall, was the crew going about its business, the two
girls in quarantine with Purcell filling the hopper with food for the
one and spoon-feeding the other; and me locked up with the records,
piecing and guessing and trying to make sense out of a limbless, eyeless
monstrosity which apparently could appear from nowhere in mid-air, even
indoors (like the one that killed Katherine Flent), and which looked as
if it could not live, but which still would attack and could kill. I got
no place. I mulled over more theories than I’ll go into, some of ’em
pretty far-fetched, like a fourth-dimensional thing that … well, on the
other hand, Nature can be pretty far-fetched too, as anyone who has seen
the rear end of a mandrill will attest.

What do you know about sea cucumbers, as another nauseating example?

We popped out of the flicker-field in due time, and Luna was good to
see. We transferred to a rocket-ferry at Outer Orbit and dropped in
smoothly, and came into the base here in quarantine procedure,
impounding ferry and all. The girls were at last put into competent
hands, and the crew was given the usual screening. Usual or not, it’s
about as thorough as a physical examination can get, and after they’d
all been cleared, and slept six hours, and gone through it again and
been cleared again, I gave them seventy-two-hour passes, renewable, and
turned ’em loose.

I was more than anxious to go along too, but by that time I was up to
the eyeballs in specialists and theorists, and in some specialties and
theories that began to get too fascinating for even a home-hungry hound
like me to ignore. That was when I called you and said how tied up I was
and swore I’d be out of there in another day. You were nice about that.
Of course, I had no idea it wouldn’t be just one more day, but another
six weeks.

Right after the crew was turned loose they called me out of the
semantics section, where we were collating all notes and records, into
the psych division.

They had one of the … the things there.

I have to hand it to those guys. I guess they were just as tempted as
Clement was when he first saw one, to burn it into nothing as fast as it
could be burned. I saw it, and that was my first impulse. God. No amount
of clinical reporting like Clement’s could give you the remotest idea of
just how disgusting one of those things is.

They’d been working over Glenda Spooner. Catatonics are hard to do
anything with, but they used some high-potency narcosyntheses and some
field inductions, and did a regression. They found out just what sort of
a catatonic she was. Some, you probably know, retreat like that as a
result of some profound shock—after they have been shocked. It’s an
escape. But some go into that seize-up in the split second _before_ the
shock. Then it isn’t an escape, it’s a defense. And that was our girl
Glenda.

They regressed her until they had her located out in the field,
searching for Clement. Then they brought her forward again, so that in
her mind she was contacting Amy, slogging through the rain back to the
base. They got to where Amy entered the recording shack and screamed,
seeing Katherine Flent looking that way. There they located the exact
split second of trauma, the moment when something happened which was so
terrible that Glenda had not let herself see it.

More dope, more application of the fields though the helmet they had her
strapped into. They regressed her a few minutes and had her approach
that moment again. They tried it again, and some more, making slight
adjustments each time, knowing that sooner or later they would have the
exact subtle nudge that would push her through her self-induced barrier,
making her at last experience the thing she was so afraid to
acknowledge.

And they did it, and when they did it, the soft gutty _thing_ appeared,
slamming into a technician fifteen feet away, hitting him so hard it
knocked him flat and slid him spinning into the far wall. He was a young
fellow named Petri and it killed him. Like Katherine Flent, he died
probably before he felt the acid burns. He went right into the
transformer housing and died in a net of sparks.

And as I said, these boys had their wits about them. Sure, someone went
to help Petri (though not in time) and someone else went after a flame
pistol. He wasn’t in time either; because when he got back with it,
Shellabarger and Li Kyu had the glass bell off a vacuum rig and had
corralled the filthy thing with it. They slid a resilient mat under it
and slapped a coupling on top and jetted the jar full of liquid aragon.

This time there was no charred mass, no kicked-apart, rain-soaked
scatter of parts to deal with. Here was a perfect specimen, if you can
call such a thing perfect, frozen solid while it was still alive and
trying to hop up and down and find someone to bubble its dirty acids on.
They had it to keep, to slice up with a microtome, even to revive, if
anyone had the strong guts.

Glenda proved clearly that with her particular psychic makeup, she had
chosen the right defense. When she saw the thing, she died of fright. It
was that, just that, that she had tried to avoid with catatonia. The
psycho boys breached it, and found out just how right she had been. But
at least she didn’t die uselessly, like Flent and Clement and poor
Katherine. Because it was her autopsy that cleared things up.

One thing they found was pretty subtle. It was a nuclear pattern in the
cells of the connective tissue quite unlike anything any of them had
seen before. They checked Amy Segal for it and found the same thing.
They checked me for it and didn’t. That was when I sent out the recall
order for the whole crew. I didn’t think any of them would have it, but
we had to be sure. If that got loose on Earth …

All but one of the crew had a clean bill when given the new test, and
there wasn’t otherwise anything wrong with that one.

The other thing Glenda’s autopsy revealed was anything but subtle.

Her abdomen was empty.

Her liver, kidneys, almost all of the upper and all of the lower
intestine were missing, along with the spleen, the bladder, and assorted
tripe of that nature. Remaining were the uterus, with the Fallopian
tubes newly convoluted and the ovaries tacked right to the uterus
itself; the stomach; a single loop of what had once been upper
intestine, attached in a dozen places to various spots on the wall of
the peritoneum. It emptied directly into a rectal segment, without any
distinctive urinary system, much like the primitive equipment of a bird.

Everything that was missing, they found under the bell jar.

Now we knew what had hit Katherine Flent, and why Amy was empty and
starved when we found her. Joe Flent had been killed by … one of
the … well, by something that erupted at him as he bent over the trapped
Clement. Clement himself had been struck on the side of the face by such
a thing—and whose was that?

Why, that primate’s. The primate he walked into submission, and touched,
and frightened.

It bit him in panic terror. Joe Flent was killed in a moment of panic
terror too—not his, but Clement’s, who saw the rock-slide coming.
Katherine Flent died in a moment of terror—not hers, but Amy’s, as Amy
crouched cornered in the shack and watched Katherine coming with a
knife. And the one which had appeared on earth, in the psych lab, why,
that needed the same thing to be borne in—when the boys forced Glenda
Spooner across a mental barrier she could not cross and live.

We had everything now but the mechanics of the thing, and that we got
from Amy, the bravest woman yet. By the time we were through with her,
every man in the place admired her g—uh, dammit, not that. Admired her
fortitude. She was probed and goaded and prodded and checked, and
finally went through a whole series of advanced exploratories. By the
time the exploratories began, about six weeks had gone by, that is, six
weeks from Katherine Flent’s death, and Amy was almost back to normal;
she’d tapered off on the calories, her abdomen had filled out to almost
normal, her temperature had steadied and by and large she was okay. What
I’m trying to put over is that she had some intestines for us to
investigate—_she’d grown a new set_.

That’s right. She’d thrown her old ones at Katherine Flent.

There wasn’t anything wrong with the new ones, either. At the time of
her first examination everything was operating but the kidneys; their
function was being handled by a very simple, very efficient sort of
filter attached to the ventral wall of the peritoneum. We found a
similar organ in autopsying poor Glenda Spooner. Next to it were the
adrenals, apparently transferred there from their place astride the
original kidneys. And sure enough, we found Amy’s adrenals placed that
way, and not on the new kidneys. In a fascinating three-day sequence we
saw those new kidneys completed and begin to operate, while the
surrogate organ that had been doing their work atrophied and went quiet.
It stayed there, though, ready.

The climax of the examination came when we induced panic terror in her,
with a vivid abreaction of the events in the recording shack the day
Katherine died. Bless that Amy, when we suggested it she grinned and
said, “Sure!”

But this time it was done under laboratory conditions, with a high-speed
camera to watch the proceedings. Oh God, did they proceed!

The film showed Amy’s plain pleasant sleeping face with its stainless
halo of psych-field hood, which was hauling her subjective self back to
that awful moment in the records shack. You could tell the moment she
arrived there by the anxiety, the tension, the surprise and shock that
showed on her face. “Glenda!” she screamed, “Get Joe!”—and then …

It looked at first as if she was making a face, sticking out her tongue.
She was making a face all right, the mask of purest, terminal fear, but
that wasn’t a tongue. It came out and out, unbelievably fast even on the
slow-motion frames of the high-speed camera. At its greatest, the
diameter was no more than two inches, the length … about eight feet. It
arrowed out of her mouth, and even in midair it contracted into the
roughly spherical shape we had seen before. It struck the net that the
doctors had spread for it and dropped into a plastic container, where it
hopped and hopped, sweated, drooled, bled and died. They tried to keep
it alive but it wasn’t meant to live more than a few minutes.

On dissection they found it contained all Amy’s new equipment, in sorry
shape. All abdominal organs can be compressed to less than two inches in
diameter, but not if they’re expected to work again. These weren’t.

The thing was covered with a layer of muscle tissue, and dotted with two
kinds of ganglia, one sensory and one motor. It would keep hopping as
long as there was enough of it left to hop, which was what the motor
system did. It was geotropic, and it would alter its muscular spasms to
move it toward anything around it that lived and had warm blood, and
that’s what the primitive sensory system was for.

And at last we could discard the fifty or sixty theories that had been
formed and decide on one: That the primates of Mullygantz II had the
ability, like a terran sea cucumber, of ejecting their internal organs
when frightened, and of growing a new set; that in a primitive creature
this was a survival characteristic, and the more elaborate the ejected
matter the better the chances for the animal’s survival. Probably
starting with something as simple as a lizard’s discarding a tail
segment which just lies there and squirms to distract a pursuer, this
one had evolved from ‘distract’ to ‘attract’ and finally to ‘attack.’
True, it took a fantastic amount of forage for the animal to supply
itself with a new set of innards, but for vegetarian primates on fertile
Mullygantz II, this was no problem.

The only problem that remained was to find out exactly how terrans had
become infected, and the records cleared that up. Clement got it from a
primate’s bite. Amy and Glenda got it from Clement. The Flents may well
never have had it. Did that mean that Clement had bitten those girls?
Amy said no, and experiments proved that the activating factor passed
readily from any mucous tissue to any other. A bite would do it, but so
would a kiss. Which didn’t explain our one crew member who “contracted”
the condition. Nor did it explain what kind of a survival characteristic
it is that can get transmitted around like a virus infection, even
between species.

Within that same six weeks of quarantine, we even got an answer to that.
By a stretch of the imagination, you might call the thing a virus. At
least, it was a filterable organism which, like the tobacco mosaic or
the slime mold, had an organizing factor. You might call it a life form,
or a complex biochemical action, basically un-alive. You could call it
symbiotic. Symbiotes often go out of their way to see to it that the
hosts survive.

After entering a body, these creatures multiplied until they could
organize, and then went to work on the host. Connective tissue and
muscle fiber was where they did most of their work. They separated
muscle fibers all over the peritoneal walls and diaphragm, giving a
layer to the entrails and the rest to the exterior. They duplicated
organic functions with their efficient, primitive little surrogate
organs and glands. They hooked the illium to the stomach wall and to the
rectum, and in a dozen places to their new organic structures. Then they
apparently stood by.

When an emergency came every muscle in the abdomen and throat cooperated
in a single, synchronized spasm, and the entrails, sheathed in muscle
fiber and dotted with nerve ganglia, were compressed into a long tube
and forced out like a bullet. Instantly the revised and edited abdomen
got to work, perforating the new stomach outlet, sealing the old, and
starting the complex of simple surrogates to work. And as long as enough
new building material was received fast enough, an enormously
accelerated rebuilding job started, blueprinted God knows how from God
knows what kind of cellular memory, until in less than two months the
original abdominal contents, plus revision, were duplicated, and all was
ready for the next emergency.

Then we found that in spite of its incredible and complex hold on its
own life and those of its hosts, it had no defense at all against one of
humanity’s oldest therapeutic tools, the RF fever cabinet. A high
frequency induced fever of 108 sustained seven minutes killed it off as
if it had never existed, and we found that the “revised” gut was in
every way as good as the original, if not better (because damaged organs
were replaced with healthy ones if there was enough of them left to show
original structure)—and that by keeping a culture of the Mullygantz
‘virus’ we had the ultimate, drastic treatment for forty-odd types of
abdominal cancer—including two types for which we’d had no answer at
all!

So it was we lost the planet, and gained it back with a bonus. We could
cause this thing and cure it and diagnose it and use it, and the new
world was open again. And that part of the story, as you probably know,
came out all over the newsfax and ’casters, which is why I’m getting a
big hello from taxi drivers and doormen …

“But the ’fax said you wouldn’t be leaving the base until tomorrow
noon!” Sue said after I had spouted all this to her and at long last got
it all off my chest in one great big piece.

“Sure. They got that straight from me. I heard rumors of a parade and
speeches and God knows what else, and I wanted to get home to my walkin’
talkin’ wettin’ doll that blows bubbles.”

“You’re silly.”

“C’mere.”

The doorbell hummed.

“I’ll get it,” I said, “and throw ’em out. It’s probably a reporter.”

But Sue was already on her feet. “Let me, let me. You just stay there
and finish your drink.” And before I could stop her she flung into the
house and up the long corridor to the foyer.

I chuckled, drank my ale and got up to see who was horning in. I had my
shoes off so I guess I was pretty quiet. Though I didn’t need to be.
Purcell was roaring away in his best old salt fashion, “Let’s have us
another quickie, Susie, before the Space Scout gets through with his red
carpet treatment tomorrow—miss me, honey?” … while Sue was imploringly
trying to cover his mouth with her hands.

Maybe I ran; I don’t know. Anyway, I was there, right behind her. I
didn’t say anything. Purcell looked at me and went white. “Skipper …”

And in the hall mirror behind Purcell, my wife met my eyes. What she saw
in my face I cannot say, but in hers I saw panic terror.

In the small space between Purcell and Sue, something appeared. It
knocked Purcell into the mirror, and he slid down in a welter of blood
and stinks and broken glass. The recoil slammed Sue into my arms. I put
her by so I could watch the tattered, bleeding thing on the floor hop
and hop until it settled down on the nearest warm living thing it could
sense, which was Purcell’s face.

I let Sue watch it and crossed to the phone and called the commandant.
“Gargan,” I said, watching. “Listen, Joe, I found out that Purcell lied
about where he went in that first liberty. Also why he lied.” For a few
seconds I couldn’t seem to get my breath. “Send the meat wagon and an
ambulance, and tell Harry to get ready for another hollowbelly.… Yes, I
said, one dead.… Purcell, dammit. Do I have to draw you a cartoon?” I
roared, and hung up.

I said to Sue, who was holding on to her flat midriff, “That Purcell, I
guess it did him good to get away with things under my nose. First that
helpless catatonic Glenda on the way home, then you. I hope you had a
real good time, honey.”

It smelled bad in there so I left. I left and walked all the way back to
the Base. It took about ten hours. When I got there I went to the
Medical wing for my own fever-box cure and to do some thinking about
girls with guts, one way or the other. And I began to wait. They’d be
opening up Mullygantz II again, and I thought I might look for a girl
who’d have the … fortitude to go back with me. A girl like Amy.

Or maybe Amy.



THE OTHER CELIA


IF YOU LIVE IN A CHEAP ENOUGH ROOMING HOUSE and the doors are made of
cheap enough pine, and the locks are old-fashioned single-action jobs
and the hinges are loose, and if you have a hundred and ninety lean
pounds to operate with, you can grasp the knob, press the door sidewise
against its hinges, and slip the latch. Further, you can lock the door
the same way when you come out.

Slim Walsh lived in, and was, and had, and did these things partly
because he was bored. The company doctors had laid him up—not off,
up—for three weeks (after his helper had hit him just over the temple
with a fourteen-inch crescent wrench), pending some more X-rays. If he
was going to get just sick-leave pay, he wanted to make it stretch. If
he was going to get a big fat settlement—all to the good; what he saved
by living in this firetrap would make the money look even better.
Meanwhile, he felt fine and had nothing to do all day.

“Slim isn’t dishonest,” his mother used to tell Children’s Court some
years back. “He’s just curious.”

She was perfectly right.

Slim was constitutionally incapable of borrowing your bathroom without
looking into your medicine chest. Send him into your kitchen for a
saucer and when he came out a minute later, he’d have inventoried your
refrigerator, your vegetable bin, and (since he was six feet three
inches tall) he would know about a moldering jar of maraschino cherries
in the back of the top shelf that you’d forgotten about.

Perhaps Slim, who was not impressed by his impressive size and build,
felt that a knowledge that you secretly use hair-restorer, or are one of
those strange people who keeps a little mound of unmated socks in your
second drawer, gave him a kind of superiority. Or maybe security is a
better word. Or maybe it was an odd compensation for one of the most
advanced cases of gawking, gasping shyness ever recorded.

Whatever it was, Slim liked you better if, while talking to you, he knew
how many jackets hung in your closet, how old that unpaid phone bill
was, and just where you’d hidden those photographs. On the other hand,
Slim didn’t insist on knowing bad or even embarrassing things about you.
He just wanted to know things about you, period.

His current situation was therefore a near-paradise. Flimsy doors stood
in rows, barely sustaining vacuum on aching vacuum of knowledge; and one
by one they imploded at the nudge of his curiosity. He touched nothing
(or if he did, he replaced it carefully) and removed nothing, and within
a week he knew Mrs. Koyper’s roomers far better than she could, or cared
to. Each secret visit to the rooms gave him a starting point; subsequent
ones taught him more. He knew not only what these people had, but what
they did, where, how much, _for_ how much, and how often. In almost
every case, he knew why as well.

Almost every case. Celia Sarton came.

Now, at various times, in various places, Slim had found strange things
in other people’s rooms. There was an old lady in one shabby place who
had an electric train under her bed; used it, too. There was an old
spinster in this very building who collected bottles, large and small,
of any value or capacity, providing they were round and squat and with
long necks. A man on the second floor secretly guarded his desirables
with the unloaded .25 automatic in his top bureau drawer, for which he
had a half-box of .38 cartridges.

There was a (to be chivalrous) girl in one of the rooms who kept fresh
cut flowers before a photograph on her night table—or, rather, before a
frame in which were stacked eight photographs, one of which held the
stage each day. Seven days, eight photographs: Slim admired the system.
A new love every day and, predictably, a different love on successive
Wednesdays. And all of them movie stars.

Dozens of rooms, dozens of imprints, marks, impressions, overlays,
atmospheres of people. And they needn’t be odd ones. A woman moves into
a room, however standardized; the instant she puts down her dusting
powder on top of the flush tank, the room is _hers_. Something stuck in
the ill-fitting frame of a mirror, something draped over the long-dead
gas jet, and the samest of rooms begins to shrink toward its occupant as
if it wished, one day, to be a close-knit, formfitting, individual
integument as intimate as a skin.

But not Celia Sarton’s room.

Slim Walsh got a glimpse of her as she followed Mrs. Koyper up the
stairs to the third floor. Mrs. Koyper, who hobbled, slowed any follower
sufficiently to afford the most disinterested witness a good look, and
Slim was anything but disinterested. Yet for days he could not recall
her clearly. It was as if Celia Sarton had been—not invisible, for that
would have been memorable in itself—but translucent or chameleon-like,
drably re-radiating the drab wall color, carpet color, woodwork color.

She was—how old? Old enough to pay taxes. How tall? Tall enough. Dressed
in … whatever women cover themselves with in their statistical
thousands. Shoes, hose, skirt, jacket, hat.

She carried a bag. When you go to the baggage window at a big terminal,
you notice a suitcase here, a steamer-trunk there; and all around, high
up, far back, there are rows and ranks and racks of luggage not
individually noticed but just _there_. This bag, Celia Sarton’s bag, was
one of them.

And to Mrs. Koyper, she said—she said—She said whatever is necessary
when one takes a cheap room; and to find her voice, divide the sound of
a crowd by the number of people in it.

So anonymous, so unnoticeable was she that, aside from being aware that
she left in the morning and returned in the evening, Slim let two days
go by before he entered her room; he simply could not remind himself
about her. And when he did, and had inspected it to his satisfaction, he
had his hand on the knob, about to leave, before he recalled that the
room was, after all, occupied. Until that second, he had thought he was
giving one of the vacancies the once-over. (He did this regularly; it
gave him a reference-point.)

He grunted and turned back, flicking his gaze over the room. First he
had to assure himself that he was in the right room, which, for a man of
his instinctive orientations, was extraordinary. Then he had to spend a
moment of disbelief in his own eyes, which was all but unthinkable. When
that passed, he stood in astonishment, staring at the refutation of
everything his—hobby—had taught him about people and the places they
live in.

The bureau drawers were empty. The ashtray was clean. No toothbrush,
toothpaste, soap. In the closet, two wire hangers and one wooden one
covered with dirty quilted silk, and nothing else. Under the grime-gray
dresser scarf, nothing. In the shower stall, the medicine chest, nothing
and nothing again, except what Mrs. Koyper had grudgingly installed.

Slim went to bed and carefully turned back the faded coverlet. Maybe she
had slept in it, but very possibly not; Mrs. Koyper specialized in
unironed sheets of such a ground-in gray that it wasn’t easy to tell.
Frowning, Slim put up the coverlet again and smoothed it.

Suddenly he struck his forehead, which yielded him a flash of pain from
his injury. He ignored it. “The bag!”

It was under the bed, shoved there, not hidden there. He looked at it
without touching it for a moment, so that it could be returned exactly.
Then he hauled it out.

It was a black gladstone, neither new nor expensive, of that nondescript
rusty color acquired by untended leatherette. It had a worn zipper
closure and was not locked. Slim opened it. It contained a cardboard
box, crisp and new, for a thousand virgin sheets of cheap white
typewriter paper surrounded by a glossy bright blue band bearing a white
diamond with the legend: _Nonpareil the writers friend_ 15% _cotton
fiber trade mark registered_.

Slim lifted the paper out of the box, looked under it, riffled a
thumbful of the sheets at the top and the same from the bottom, shook
his head, replaced the paper, closed the box, put it back into the bag
and restored everything precisely as he had found it. He paused again in
the middle of the room, turning slowly once, but there was simply
nothing else to look at. He let himself out, locked the door, and went
silently back to this room.

He sat down on the edge of his bed and at last protested, “Nobody
_lives_ like that!”

His room was on the fourth and topmost floor of the old house. Anyone
else would have called it the worst room in the place. It was small,
dark, shabby and remote and it suited him beautifully.

Its door had a transom, the glass of which had many times been painted
over. By standing on the foot of his bed, Slim could apply one eye to
the peephole he had scratched in the paint and look straight down the
stairs to the third-floor landing. On this landing, hanging to the stub
of one of the ancient gas jets, was a cloudy mirror surmounted by a
dust-mantled gilt eagle and surrounded by a great many rococo carved
flowers. By careful propping with folded cigarette wrappers, innumerable
tests and a great deal of silent mileage up and down the stairs, Slim
had arranged the exact tilt necessary in the mirror so that it covered
the second floor landing as well. And just as a radar operator learns to
translate glowing pips and masses into aircraft and weather, so Slim
became expert at the interpretation of the fogged and distant image it
afforded him. Thus he had the comings and goings of half the tenants
under surveillance without having to leave his room.

It was in this mirror, at twelve minutes past six, that he saw Celia
Sarton next, and as he watched her climb the stairs, his eyes glowed.

The anonymity was gone. She came up the stairs two at a time, with a
gait like bounding. She reached the landing and whirled into her
corridor and was gone, and while a part of Slim’s mind listened for the
way she opened her door (hurriedly, rattling the key against the
lock-plate, banging the door open, slamming it shut), another part
studied a mental photograph of her face.

What raised its veil of the statistical ordinary was its set purpose.
Here were eyes only superficially interested in cars, curbs, stairs,
doors. It was as if she had projected every important part of herself
into that empty room of hers and waited there impatiently for her body
to catch up. There was something in the room, or something she had to do
there, which she could not, would not, wait for. One goes this way to a
beloved after a long parting, or to a deathbed in the last, precipitous
moments. This was not the arrival of one who wants, but of one who
needs.

Slim buttoned his shirt, eased his door open and sidled through it. He
poised a moment on his landing like a great moose sensing the air before
descending to a waterhole, and then moved downstairs.

Celia Sarton’s only neighbor in the north corridor—the spinster with the
bottles—was settled for the evening; she was of very regular habits and
Slim knew them well.

Completely confident that he would not be seen, he drifted to the girl’s
door and paused.

She was there, all right. He could see the light around the edge of the
ill-fitting door, could sense that difference between an occupied room
and an empty one, which exists however silent the occupant might be. And
this one was silent. Whatever it was that had driven her into the room
with such headlong urgency, whatever it was she was doing (_had_ to do)
was being done with no sound or motion that he could detect.

For a long time—six minutes, seven—Slim hung there, open-throated to
conceal the sound of his breath. At last, shaking his head, he withdrew,
climbed the stairs, let himself into his own room and lay down on the
bed, frowning.

He could only wait. Yet he _could_ wait. No one does any single thing
for very long. Especially a thing not involving movement. In an hour, in
two—

It was five. At half-past eleven, some faint sound from the floor below
brought Slim, half-dozing, twisting up from the bed and to his high
peephole in the transom. He saw the Sarton girl come out of the corridor
slowly, and stop, and look around at nothing in particular, like someone
confined too long in a ship’s cabin who has emerged on deck, not so much
for the lungs’ sake, but for the eyes’. And when she went down the
stairs, it was easily and without hurry, as if (again) the important
part of her was in the room. But the something was finished with for now
and what was ahead of her wasn’t important and could wait.

Standing with his hand on his own doorknob, Slim decided that he, too,
could wait. The temptation to go straight to her room was, of course,
large, but caution also loomed. What he had tentatively established as
her habit patterns did not include midnight exits. He could not know
when she might come back and it would be foolish indeed to jeopardize
his hobby—not only where it included her, but all of it—by being caught.
He sighed, mixing resignation with anticipatory pleasure, and went to
bed.

Less than fifteen minutes later, he congratulated himself with a sleepy
smile as he heard her slow footsteps mount the stairs below. He slept.

There was nothing in the closet, there was nothing in the ashtray, there
was nothing in the medicine chest nor under the dresser scarf. The bed
was made, the dresser drawers were empty, and under the bed was the
cheap gladstone. In it was a box containing a thousand sheets of typing
paper surrounded by a glossy blue band. Without disturbing this, Slim
riffled the sheets, once at the top, once at the bottom. He grunted,
shook his head and then proceeded, automatically but meticulously, to
put everything back as he had found it.

“Whatever it is this girl does at night,” he said glumly, “it leaves
tracks like it makes noise.”

He left.

The rest of the day was unusually busy for Slim. In the morning he had a
doctor’s appointment, and in the afternoon he spent hours with a company
lawyer who seemed determined to (a) deny the existence of any head
injury and (b) prove to Slim and the world that the injury must have
occurred years ago. He got absolutely nowhere. If Slim had another
characteristic as consuming and compulsive as curiosity, it was his
shyness; these two could stand on one another’s shoulders, though, and
still look upward at Slim’s stubbornness. It served its purpose. It took
hours, however, and it was after seven when he got home.

He paused at the third-floor landing and glanced down the corridor.
Celia Sarton’s room was occupied and silent. If she emerged around
midnight, exhausted and relieved, then he would know she had again raced
up the stairs to her urgent, motionless task, whatever it was … and here
he checked himself. He had long ago learned the uselessness of
cluttering up his busy head with conjectures. A thousand things might
happen; in each case, only one would. He would wait, then, and could.

And again, some hours later, he saw her come out of her corridor. She
looked about, but he knew she saw very little; her face was withdrawn
and her eyes wide and unguarded. Then, instead of going out, she went
back into her room.

He slipped downstairs half an hour later and listened at her door, and
smiled. She was washing her lingerie at the hand basin. It was a small
thing to learn, but he felt he was making progress. It did not explain
why she lived as she did, but indicated how she could manage without so
much as a spare handkerchief.

Oh, well, maybe in the morning.

In the morning, there was no maybe. He found it, he found it, though he
could not know what it was he’d found. He laughed at first, not in
triumph but wryly, calling himself a clown. Then he squatted on his
heels in the middle of the floor (he would not sit on the bed, for fear
of leaving wrinkles of his own on those Mrs. Koyper supplied) and
carefully lifted the box of paper out of the suitcase and put it on the
floor in front of him.

Up to now, he had contented himself with a quick riffle of the blank
paper, a little at the top, a little at the bottom. He had done just
this again, without removing the box from the suitcase, but only taking
the top off and tilting up the banded ream of
_Nonpareil-the-writers-friend_. And almost in spite of itself, his quick
eye had caught the briefest flash of pale blue.

Gently, he removed the band, sliding it off the pack of paper, being
careful not to slit the glossy finish. Now he could freely riffle the
pages, and when he did, he discovered that all of them except a hundred
or so, top and bottom, had the same rectangular cut-out, leaving only a
narrow margin all the way around. In the hollow space thus formed,
something was packed.

He could not tell what the something was, except that it was pale tan,
with a tinge of pink, and felt like smooth untextured leather. There was
a lot of it, neatly folded so that it exactly fitted the hole in the
ream of paper.

He puzzled over it for some minutes without touching it again,and then,
scrubbing his fingertips against his shirt until he felt that they were
quite free of moisture and grease, he gently worked loose the top corner
of the substance and unfolded a layer. All he found was more of the
same.

He folded it down flat again to be sure he could, and then brought more
of it out. He soon realized that the material was of an irregular shape
and almost certainly of one piece, so that folding it into a tight
rectangle required care and great skill. Therefore he proceeded very
slowly, stopping every now and then to fold it up again, and it took him
more than an hour to get enough of it out so that he could identify it.

Identify? It was completely unlike anything he had ever seen before.

It was a human skin, done in some substance very like the real thing.
The first fold, the one which had been revealed at first, was an area of
the back, which is why it showed no features. One might liken it to a
balloon, except that a deflated balloon is smaller in every dimension
than an inflated one. As far as Slim could judge, this was life-sized—a
little over five feet long and proportioned accordingly. The hair was
peculiar, looking exactly like the real thing until flexed, and then
revealing itself to be one piece.

It had Celia Sarton’s face.

Slim closed his eyes and opened them, and found that it was still true.
He held his breath and put forth a careful, steady forefinger and gently
pressed the left eyelid upward. There was an eye under it, all right,
light blue and seemingly moist, but flat.

Slim released the breath, closed the eye and sat back on his heels. His
feet were beginning to tingle from his having knelt on the floor for so
long.

He looked all around the room once, to clear his head of strangeness,
and then began to fold the thing up again. It took a while, but when he
was finished, he knew he had it right. He replaced the typewriter paper
in the box and the box in the bag, put the bag away and at last stood in
the middle of the room in the suspension which overcame him when he was
deep in thought.

After a moment of this, he began to inspect the ceiling. It was made of
stamped tin, like those of many old-fashioned houses. It was grimy and
flaked and stained; here and there, rust showed through, and in one or
two places, edges of the tin sheets had sagged. Slim nodded to himself
in profound satisfaction, listened for a while at the door, let himself
out, locked it and went upstairs.

He stood in his own corridor for a minute, checking the position of
doors, the hall window, and his accurate orientation of the same things
on the floor below. Then he went into his own room.

His room, though smaller than most, was one of the few in the house
which was blessed with a real closet instead of a rickety off-the-floor
wardrobe. He went into it and knelt, and grunted in satisfaction when he
found how loose the ancient, unpainted floorboards were. By removing the
side baseboard, he found it possible to get to the air space between the
fourth floor and the third-floor ceiling.

He took out boards until he had an opening perhaps fourteen inches wide,
and then, working in almost total silence, he began cleaning away dirt
and old plaster. He did this meticulously, because when he finally
pierced the tin sheeting, he wanted not one grain of dirt to fall into
the room below. He took his time and it was late in the afternoon when
he was satisfied with his preparations and began, with his knife, on the
tin.

It was thinner and softer than he had dared to hope; he almost overcut
on the first try. Carefully he squeezed the sharp steel into the little
slot he had cut, lengthening it. When it was somewhat less than an inch
long, he withdrew all but the point of the knife and twisted it
slightly, moved it a sixteenth of an inch and twisted again, repeating
this all down the cut until he had widened it enough for his purposes.

He checked the time, then returned to Celia Sarton’s room for just long
enough to check the appearance of his work from that side. He was very
pleased with it. The little cut had come through a foot away from the
wall over the bed and was a mere pencil line lost in the baroque design
with which the tin was stamped and the dirt and rust that marred it. He
returned to his room and sat down to wait.

He heard the old house coming to its evening surge of life, a voice
here, a door there, footsteps on the stairs. He ignored them all as he
sat on the edge of his bed, hands folded between his knees, eyes half
closed, immobile like a machine fueled, oiled, tuned and ready, lacking
only the right touch on the right control. And like that touch, the
faint sound of Celia Sarton’s footsteps moved him.

To use his new peephole, he had to lie on the floor half in and half out
of the closet, with his head in the hole, actually below floor level.
With this, he was perfectly content, any amount of discomfort being well
worth his trouble—an attitude he shared with many an ardent hobbyist,
mountain-climber or speleologist, duck-hunter or bird-watcher.

When she turned on the light, he could see her splendidly, as well as
most of the floor, the lower third of the door and part of the washbasin
in the bathroom.

She had come in hurriedly, with that same agonized haste he had observed
before. At the same second she turned on the light, she had apparently
flung her handbag toward the bed; it was in mid-air as the light
appeared. She did not even glance its way, but hastily fumbled the old
gladstone from under the bed, opened it, removed the box, opened it,
took out the paper, slipped off the blue band and removed the blank
sheets of paper which covered the hollowed-out ream.

She scooped out the thing hidden there, shaking it once like a grocery
clerk with a folded paper sack, so that the long limp thing straightened
itself out. She arranged it carefully on the worn linoleum of the floor,
arms down at the side, legs slightly apart, face up, neck straight. Then
she lay down on the floor, too, head-to-head with the deflated thing.
She reached up over her head, took hold of the collapsed image of
herself about the region of the ears, and for a moment did some sort of
manipulation of it against the top of her own head.

Slim heard faintly a sharp, chitinous click, like the sound one makes by
snapping the edge of a thumbnail against the edge of a fingernail.

Her hands slipped to the cheeks of the figure and she pulled at the
empty head as if testing a connection. The head seemed now to have
adhered to hers.

Then she assumed the same pose she had arranged for the other, letting
her hands fall wearily to her sides on the floor, closing her eyes.

For a long while, nothing seemed to be happening, except for the odd way
she was breathing, very deeply but very slowly, like the slow-motion
picture of someone panting, gasping for breath after a long hard run.
After perhaps ten minutes of this, the breathing became shallower and
even slower, until, at the end of a half hour, he could detect none at
all.

Slim lay there immobile for more than an hour, until his body shrieked
protest and his head ached from eyestrain. He hated to move, but move he
must. Silently he backed out of the closet, stood up and stretched. It
was a great luxury and he deeply enjoyed it. He felt moved to think over
what he had just seen, but clearly and consciously decided not to—not
yet, anyway.

When he was unkinked, again he crept into the closet, putting his head
in the hole and his eye to the slot.

Nothing had changed. She still lay quiet, utterly relaxed, so much so
that her hands had turned palm upward.

Slim watched and he watched. Just as he was about to conclude that this
was the way the girl spent her entire nights and that there would be
nothing more to see, he saw a slight and sudden contraction about the
region of her solar plexus, and then another. For a time, there was
nothing more, and then the empty thing attached to the top of her head
began to fill.

And Celia Sarton began to empty.

Slim stopped breathing until it hurt and watched in total astonishment.

Once it had started, the process progressed swiftly. It was as if
something passed from the clothed body of the girl to this naked empty
thing. The something, whatever it might be, had to be fluid, for nothing
but a fluid would fill a flexible container in just this way, or make a
flexible container slowly and evenly flatten out like this. Slim could
see the fingers, which had been folded flat against the palms, inflate
and move until they took on the normal relaxed curl of a normal hand.
The elbows shifted a little to lie more normally against the body. And
yes, it was a body now.

The other one was not a body any more. It lay foolishly limp in its
garments, its sleeping face slightly distorted by its flattening. The
fingers fell against the palms by their own limp weight. The shoes
thumped quietly on their sides, heels together, toes pointing in
opposite directions.

The exchange was done in less than ten minutes and then the newly filled
body moved.

It flexed its hands tentatively, drew up its knees and stretched its
legs out again, arched its back against the floor. Its eyes flickered
open. It put up its arms and made some deft manipulation at the top of
its head. Slim heard another version of the soft-hard click and the
now-empty head fell flat to the floor.

The new Celia Sarton sat up and sighed and rubbed her hands lightly over
her body, as if restoring circulation and sensation to a chilled skin.
She stretched as comfortingly and luxuriously as Slim had a few minutes
earlier. She looked rested and refreshed.

At the top of her head, Slim caught a glimpse of a slit through which a
wet whiteness showed, but it seemed to be closing. In a brief time,
nothing showed there but a small valley in the hair, like a normal
parting.

She sighed again and got up. She took the clothed thing on the floor by
the neck, raised it and shook it twice to make the clothes fall away.
She tossed it to the bed and carefully picked up the clothes and
deployed them about the room, the undergarments in the washbasin, the
dress and slip on a hanger in the wardrobe.

Moving leisurely but with purpose, she went into the bathroom and,
except for her shins down, out of Slim’s range of vision. Then he heard
the same faint domestic sounds he had once detected outside her door, as
she washed her underclothes. She emerged in due course, went to the
wardrobe for some wire hangers and took them into the bathroom. Back she
came with the underwear folded on the hangers, which she hooked to the
top of the open wardrobe door. Then she took the deflated integument
which lay crumpled on the bed, shook it again, rolled it up into a ball
and took it into the bathroom.

Slim heard more water-running and sudsing noises, and, by ear, followed
the operation through a soaping and two rinses. Then she came out again,
shaking out the object, which had apparently just been wrung, pulled it
through a wooden clothes hanger, arranged it creaselessly depending from
the crossbar of the hanger with the bar about at its waistline, and hung
it with the others on the wardrobe door.

Then she lay down on the bed, not to sleep or to read or even to
rest—she seemed very rested—but merely to wait until it was time to do
something else.

By now, Slim’s bones were complaining again, so he wormed noiselessly
backward out of his lookout point, got into his shoes and a jacket, and
went out to get something to eat. When he came home an hour later and
looked, her light was out and he could see nothing. He spread his
overcoat carefully over the hole in the closet so no stray light from
his room would appear in the little slot in the ceiling, closed the
door, read a comic book for a while, and went to bed.

The next day, he followed her. What strange occupation she might have,
what weird vampiric duties she might disclose, he did not speculate on.
He was doggedly determined to gather information first and think later.

What he found out about her daytime activities was, if anything, more
surprising than any wild surmise. She was a clerk in a small
five-and-ten on the East Side. She ate in the store’s lunch bar at
lunchtime—a green salad and a surprising amount of milk—and in the
evening she stopped at a hot-dog stand and drank a small container of
milk, though she ate nothing.

Her steps were slowed by then and she moved wearily, speeding up only
when she was close to the rooming house, and then apparently all but
overcome with eagerness to get home and … into something more
comfortable. She was watched in this process, and Slim, had he
disbelieved his own eyes the first time, must believe them now.

So it went for a week, three days of which Slim spent in shadowing her,
every evening in watching her make her strange toilet. Every twenty-four
hours, she changed bodies, carefully washing, drying, folding and
putting away the one she was not using.

Twice during the week, she went out for what was apparently a
constitutional and nothing more—a half-hour around midnight, when she
would stand on the walk in front of the rooming house, or wander around
the block.

At work, she was silent but not unnaturally so; she spoke, when spoken
to, in a small, unmusical voice. She seemed to have no friends; she
maintained her aloofness by being uninteresting and by seeking no one
out and by needing no one. She evinced no outside interests, never going
to the movies or to the park. She had no dates, not even with girls.
Slim thought she did not sleep, but lay quietly in the dark waiting for
it to be time to get up and go to work.

And when he came to think about it, as ultimately he did, it occurred to
Slim that within the anthill in which we all live and have our being,
enough privacy can be exacted to allow for all sorts of strangeness in
the members of society, providing the strangeness is not permitted to
show. If it is a man’s pleasure to sleep upside-down like a bat, and if
he so arranges his life that no one ever sees him sleeping, or his
sleeping place, why, batlike he may sleep all the days of his life.

One need not, by these rules, even _be_ a human being. Not if the
mimicry is good enough. It is a measure of Slim’s odd personality to
report that Celia Sarton’s ways did not frighten him. He was, if
anything, less disturbed by her now than he’d been before he had begun
to spy on her. He knew what she did in her room and how she lived.
Before, he had not known. Now he did. This made him much happier.

He was, however, still curious.

His curiosity would never drive him to do what another man might—to
speak to her on the stairs or on the street, get to know her and more
about her. He was too shy for that. Nor was he moved to report to anyone
the odd practice he watched each evening. It wasn’t his business to
report. She was doing no harm as far as he could see. In his cosmos,
everybody had a right to live and make a buck if they could.

Yet his curiosity, its immediacy taken care of, did undergo a change. It
was not in him to wonder what sort of being this was and whether its
ancestors had grown up among human beings, living with them in caves and
tents, developing and evolving along with _homo sap_ until it could
assume the uniform of the smallest and most invisible of wage-workers.
He would never reach the conclusion that in the fight for survival, a
species might discover that a most excellent characteristic for survival
among human beings might be not to fight them but to join them.

No, Slim’s curiosity was far simpler, more basic and less informed than
any of these conjectures. He simply changed the field of his wonderment
from _what to what if?_

So it was that on the eighth day of his survey, a Tuesday, he went again
to her room, got the bag, opened it, removed the box, opened it, removed
the ream of paper, slid the blue band off, removed the covering sheets,
took out the second Celia Sarton, put her on the bed and then replaced
paper, blue band, box-cover, box, and bag just as he had found them. He
put the folded thing under his shirt and went out, carefully locking the
door behind him in his special way, and went upstairs to his room. He
put his prize under the four clean shirts in his bottom drawer and sat
down to await Celia Sarton’s homecoming.

She was a little late that night—twenty minutes, perhaps. The delay
seemed to have increased both her fatigue and her eagerness; she burst
in feverishly, moved with the rapidity of near-panic. She looked drawn
and pale and her hands shook. She fumbled the bag from under the bed,
snatched out the box and opened it, contrary to her usual measured
movements, by inverting it over the bed and dumping out its contents.

When she saw nothing there but sheets of paper, some with a wide
rectangle cut from them and some without, she froze. She crouched over
that bed without moving for an interminable two minutes. Then she
straightened up slowly and glanced about the room. Once she fumbled
through the paper, but resignedly, without hope. She made one sound, a
high, sad whimper, and, from that moment on, was silent.

She went to the window slowly, her feet dragging, her shoulders slumped.
For a long time, she stood looking out at the city, its growing
darkness, its growing colonies of lights, each a symbol of life and
life’s usages. The she drew down the blind and went back to the bed.

She stacked the papers there with loose uncaring fingers and put the
heap of them on the dresser. She took off her shoes and placed them
neatly side-by-side on the floor by the bed. She lay down in the same
utterly relaxed pose she affected when she made her change, hands down
and open, legs a little apart.

Her face looked like a death mask, its tissues sunken and sagging. It
was flushed and sick-looking. There was a little of the deep regular
breathing, but only a little. There was a bit of the fluttering
contractions at the midriff, but only a bit. Then—nothing.

Slim backed away from the peephole and sat up. He felt very bad about
this. He had been only curious; he hadn’t wanted her to get sick, to
die. For he was sure she had died. How could he know what sort of
sleep-surrogate an organism like this might require, or what might be
the results of a delay in changing? What could he know of the chemistry
of such a being? He had thought vaguely of slipping down the next day
while she was out and returning her property. Just to see. Just to know
_what if_. Just out of curiosity.

Should he call a doctor?

She hadn’t. She hadn’t even tried, though she must have known much
better than he did how serious her predicament was. (Yet if a species
depended for its existence on secrecy, it would be species-survival to
let an individual die undetected.) Well, maybe not calling a doctor
meant that she’d be all right, after all. Doctors would have a lot of
silly questions to ask. She might even tell the doctor about her other
skin, and if Slim was the one who had fetched the doctor, Slim might be
questioned about that.

Slim didn’t want to get involved with anything. He just wanted to know
things.

He thought, “I’ll take another look.”

He crawled back into the closet and put his head in the hole. Celia
Sarton, he knew instantly, would not survive this. Her face was swollen,
her eyes protruded, and her purpled tongue lolled far—too far—from the
corner of her mouth. Even as he watched, her face darkened still more
and the skin of it crinkled until it looked like carbon paper which has
been balled up tight and then smoothed out.

The very beginnings of an impulse to snatch the thing she needed out of
his shirt drawer and rush it down to her died within him, for he saw a
wisp of smoke emerge from her nostrils and then—

Slim cried out, snatched his head from the hole, bumping it cruelly, and
clapped his hands over his eyes. Put the biggest size flash bulb an inch
from your nose, and fire it, and you might get a flare approaching the
one he got through his little slot in the tin ceiling.

He sat grunting in pain and watching, on the insides of his eyelids,
migrations of flaming worms. At last they faded and he tentatively
opened his eyes. They hurt and the after-image of the slot hung before
him, but at least he could see.

Feet pounded on the stairs. He smelled smoke and a burned, oily
unpleasant something which he could not identify. Someone shouted.
Someone hammered on a door. Then someone screamed and screamed.

It was in the papers next day. Mysterious, the story said. Charles Fort,
in _Lo!_, had reported many such cases and there had been others
since—people burned to a crisp by a fierce heat which had nevertheless
not destroyed clothes or bedding, while leaving nothing for autopsy.
This was, said the paper, either an unknown kind of heat or heat of such
intensity and such brevity that it would do such a thing. No known
relatives, it said. Police mystified—no clues or suspects.

Slim didn’t say anything to anybody. He wasn’t curious about the matter
any more. He closed up the hole in the closet that same night, and next
day, after he read the story, he used the newspaper to wrap up the thing
in his shirt drawer. It smelled pretty bad and, even that early, was too
far gone to be unfolded. He dropped it into a garbage can on the way to
the lawyer’s office on Wednesday.

They settled his lawsuit that afternoon and he moved.



AFFAIR WITH A GREEN MONKEY


THERE WAS THIS TRAINED NURSE who retired at twenty-four to marry a big
guy, six foot seven, top brass in a Government agency. He was home only
weekends. His name was Fritz Rhys. About sick people, wrong people,
different people, he was a very understanding guy. It was his business
to understand them.

So one night he went for a walk with his wife Alma down to this little
park on the riverfront where they could get some air. There was a
fountain and a bench where they could sit and see the lights across the
water and flowerbeds and all that, and this particular Sunday night
there was a bunch of punks, eight of them, kicking someone to death over
by the railing. Fritz Rhys understood right away what was happening and
what to do, and in three big jumps he was right in the middle of it. He
snatched a hunk of broom-handle away from one of the kids just before it
got buried in the victim, and then they all saw him and that was the end
of that. They cut out of there, ducking around Alma where she stood as
if she was dangerous too.

Alma ran over to where Fritz knelt and helped him turn the man over. She
got Fritz’s display handkerchief and sponged the blood and broken teeth
out of the slack mouth and turned the head to one side, and did the
other things trained nurses are trained to do.

“Anything broken?”

She said yes. “His arm. Maybe internal injuries too. We’d better get an
ambulance.”

“Home’s quicker. Hey boy! You’re all right now. _Up_ you go!” So by the
time the man got his eyes open Fritz had him on his feet.

They half carried him up the steps and over the foot-bridge that crosses
the Drive, and Fritz was right, they had him back to their apartment
forty minutes sooner than it would have taken to call a wagon.

She was going to phone but he stopped her. “We can handle it. Get some
pajamas.” He looked at the injured man draped over one big arm. “Get
some of yours. He won’t mind.”

They cleaned him up and splinted the arm. It wasn’t so bad. Bruises on
the ribs and buttocks, and then the face, but he was lucky. “Give him
one week and one dentist and you’ll never know it happened.”

“He will.”

“Oh, that,” Fritz said.

She said, “What do you suppose they did it for?”

“Green monkey.”

“Oh,” she said, and they left the man sleeping and went to bed. At five
in the morning Fritz rose quietly and got dressed and she didn’t wake up
until he thumped his suitcase down by the bed and bent over to kiss her
goodbye.

She gave him his kiss and then came all the way awake and said, “Fritz!
You’re not just—leaving, like always?”

He wanted to know why not, and she pointed at the guest room. “Leave me
with—”

He laughed at her. “Believe me, honey, you haven’t got a thing to worry
about.”

“But he … I … oh, Fritz!”

“If anything happens you can call me.”

“In _Washington?_” She sat up and sort of hugged the sheet around her.
“Oh, why can’t I just send him to a hospital where—”

He had a way sometimes of being so patient it was insulting. He said,
“Because I want to talk to him, help him, when he’s better, and you know
what hospitals are. You just keep him happy and tell him not to leave
until I can have a talk with him.” Then he said something so gentle and
careful that she knew when to shut up: “And let’s say no more about it,
shall we?” So she said no more about it and he went back to Washington.

The pajamas were small for him but not much and he was about her age,
too. (Fritz Rhys was quite a bit older.) He had a name that she got fond
of saying, and small strong hands. All day Monday he was kind of dazed
and didn’t say much, only smiled thanks for the eggnog and bouillon and
bedpan and so on. Tuesday he was up and about. His clothes were back
from the cleaners and mended and he put them on and they sat around the
whole day talking. Alma read books a good deal and she read aloud to
him. She played a lot of music on the phonograph too. Whatever she
liked, he liked even better. Wednesday she took him to the dentist, once
in the morning to get the stubs ground down and impressed, and again in
the afternoon to have the temporary acrylic caps cemented in. By this
time the lip swelling was all but gone, and with the teeth fixed up she
found herself spending a lot of time just looking at his mouth. His hair
shone in the sun and she half believed it would shine in the dark too.
He somehow never answered her when she wanted to know where he came
from. Maybe there was too much laughing going on at the time. They
laughed a whole lot together. Anyway it was some place where you
couldn’t get spaghetti. She took him to an Italian restaurant for dinner
and had to teach him how to spin it on his fork. They had a lot of fun
with that and he ate plenty of it.

On Wednesday night—late—she phoned her husband.

“Alma! What is it? Are you all right?”

She did not answer until he called her name twice again, and then she
said, all whispery, “Yes, Fritz. I’m all right. Fritz, I’m
_frightened!_”

“Of what?”

She didn’t say anything, though he could hear her trying.

“Is it the … what’s his name, anyway?”

“Loolyo.”

“Julio?”

She sang: “Lool-yo.”

“Well, then. What’s he done?”

“N-nothing.”

“Well then—are you afraid of anything he might do?”

_“Oh, no!”_

“You’re so right. I understood that when I left, or he wouldn’t be
there. Now then: he hasn’t done anything, and you’re sure he won’t, and
I’m sure he won’t, so—why call me up this time of night?”

She didn’t say anything.

“Alma?”

“Fritz,” she said. She was swift, hoarse: “Come home. Come right home.”

“Act your age!”

_“Your three minutes are up. Signal when through please.”_

“Yes operator.”

“Alma! Are you calling from an outside phone? Why aren’t you home?”

“I couldn’t bear to have him hear me,” she whispered. “Goodbye, Fritz.”
He might have said something more to her, but she hung up and went home.

On Thursday she phoned for the car and packed a picnic and they went to
the beach. It was too cold to swim but they sat on the sand most of the
day and talked, and sang some. “I’m frightened,” she said again, but she
said it to herself. Once they talked about Fritz. She asked him why
those boys had clobbered him and he said he didn’t know. She said Fritz
knew. “He says you’re a green monkey,” and she explained it: “He says if
you catch a monkey in the jungle and paint it green, all the other
monkeys will tear it to pieces because it’s different. Not dangerous,
just different.”

“Different how?” Loolyo asked, in a quiet voice, about himself.

She had a lot of answers to that, but they were all things of her own
and she didn’t mention them. She just said again that Fritz knew. “He’s
going to help you.”

He looked at her and said, “He must be a good man.”

She thought that over and said, “He’s a very understanding man.”

“What does he do in Washington?”

“He’s an expert on rehabilitation programs.”

“Rehabilitation of what?”

“People.”

“Oh.… I’m looking forward to Saturday.”

She told him, “I love you.” He turned to her as she sat round eyed, all
her left knuckles in her mouth so that the ring hurt her.

“You don’t mean that.”

“I didn’t mean to say it.”

After that, and on Friday, they stayed together, but like the wires on
your lamp cord, never touching. They went to the zoo, where Loolyo
looked at the animals excited as a child, except the monkeys, which made
them be quiet and go quickly to something else. The longer the day got
the quieter they were together, and at dinner they said almost nothing,
and after that they even stopped looking at each other. That night when
it was darkest she went to his room and opened the door and closed it
again behind her. She did not turn on the light. She said, “I don’t
care …” and again, “I don’t care,” and wept in a whisper.

Loolyo was alone in the apartment when Fritz came home. “Shopping,” he
answered the big man’s question. “Good afternoon, Mr. Rhys. I’m glad to
see you.”

“Fritz,” instructed Fritz. “You’re looking chipper. Alma been good to
you?”

Loolyo smiled enough to light up the place.

“What’d you say your name was? Julio? Oh yeh, Loolyo, I remember. Well,
Lou m’lad, let’s have our little talk. Sit down over there and let me
have a good look at you.” He took a good long look and then grunted and
nodded, satisfied. “You ashamed of yourself, boy?”

“Wh …? Ashamed? Uh—no, I don’t think so.”

“Good! That means this doesn’t have to be a long talk at all. Just to
make it even shorter, I want you to know from the start that I know what
you are and you don’t have to hide it and it doesn’t matter a damn to me
and I’m not going to pry. Okay?”

_“You know?”_

Fritz boomed a big laugh. “Don’t _worry_ so, Louie! Everybody you meet
doesn’t see what I see. It’s my business to see these things and
understand them.”

Loolyo shifted nervously. “What things are you talking about?”

“Shape of the hands. Way you walk, way you sit, way you show your
feelings, sound of your voice. Lots more. All small things, any one or
two or six might mean nothing. But all together—I’m on to you, I
understand you. I’m not asking, I’m telling. And I don’t _care_. It’s
just that I can tell you how to behave so you don’t get mobbed again.
You want to hear it or don’t you?”

Loolyo didn’t look a thing in the world but puzzled. Fritz stood up and
pulled off his jacket and shirt and threw them on the corner of the
couch and fell back in the big chair, altogether relaxed. He began to
talk like a man who loves talking and who knows what to say because he’s
said it all before, knows he’s right, knows he says it well. “A lot of
people live among people all their lives and never find out this one
simple thing about people: human beings cease to be human when they
congregate, and a mob is a monster. If you think of a mob as a living
thing and you want to get its I.Q., take the average intelligence of the
people there and divide it by the number of people there. Which means
that a mob of fifty has somewhat less intelligence than an earthworm. No
one person could sink to its level of cruelty and lack of principle. It
thinks that anything that is different is dangerous, and it thinks it’s
protecting itself by tearing anything that’s different to small bloody
bits. The difference-which-is-dangerous changes with the times. Men have
been mob-murdered for wearing beards, and for not wearing beards. For
saying the right series of words in what the mob thinks is the wrong
order. For wearing or not wearing this or that article of clothing, or
tattoo, or piece of skin.”

“That’s … ugly,” Loolyo said.

“ ‘That’s … ugly,’ “Fritz repeated, with completely accurate and
completely insulting mimicry, then made his big roar of laughter and
told Loolyo not to get mad. “You’ve just made a point for me, but wait a
bit till I get to it.” He leaned back and went on with his speech. “Now,
of all ‘dangerous’ differences which incite the mob, the one that hits
’em hardest, quickest and nastiest is any variation in sex. It devolves
upon every human being to determine which sex he belongs to and then to
_be_ that as loud as possible for as long as he lives. To the smallest
detail men dress like men and women dress like women, and God help them
if they cross the line. A man has got to look and act like a man. That
isn’t a right. It’s a duty. And no matter how weird mankind gets in its
rules and regulations—whether manhood demands shoulder-length hair for a
Cavalier or waist-length for a Sikh or a crew-cut for a Bavarian, the
rules must be followed or bloody well else.

“Now, as for you people,” Fritz said, sitting up and flipping his long
index finger down and forward, like a sharpshooter practicing a snap
shot, “you are what you are just like everybody else. But I’m not
talking about what you are—that’s self-evident—only about how you’re
treated.

“The only big difference between you and normal people, in those terms,
is that they must display their sex and insist on it, and you may not.
But I mean, you one hundred percent by God _may_ not, not in public.
Among your own kind you can camp and scream and giggle to your heart’s
content, but don’t let yourself get caught at it. It would be better not
to do it at all.”

“Now wait, wait, wait,” Loolyo barked. “Hold on here. What has this got
to do with me?”

Fritz opened his eyes big and round and then closed them and slumped
into the cushions. He said in a very very tired voice, “Aw, now lookit.
You’re not going to bust into the middle of this and make me go all the
way back to the beginning.”

“I just want to know what makes you think—”

“Sit down and shut up!” Fritz bellowed, and he was the man who could do
it. “Do you or do you not want to know how to go about among human
beings without getting your girlish face kicked down your throat?”

Loolyo stood for a while, pale, his bright eyes drawn down to angry
slits. It was as if Fritz’s question didn’t reach him all at once, but
had to percolate in. Slowly he sat down again. “Go ahead then.”

Fritz nodded approvingly. “I hate a bad liar, Louie, and you were about
to try the one lie you could never get away with. Not with anyone who
understands you.… All right then. My advice to you:

Be a man. Not any old man, not mankind, but manhood. To do this you
don’t need to play pro football and grow hair on your chest and seduce
every third woman you meet long as she’s female. All you have to do is
hunt, fish (or talk sense about ’em as if you had) and go bug-eyed when
the girls go by. If a sunset moves you so much you _have_ to express
yourself, do it with a grunt and a dirty word. Or you say, ‘That
Beethoven, he blows a cool symphony.’ Never champion a real underdog
unless it’s a popular type, like a baseball team. Always treat other men
as if you were sore at something and will wipe it off on them if they
give you the slightest excuse. I mean sore, Louis, not vexed or in a
snit. And stay away from women. They have an intuition that’ll find you
nine times out of ten. The tenth time she falls for you, and there’s
nothing funnier.”

“I think,” Loolyo said after a time, “that you hate human beings.”

“I understand ’em, that’s all. Do you think I hate you?”

“Maybe you should. I’m not what you think I am.”

Fritz Rhys shook his head and quietly cursed. “All right. Wear your
cellophane mask if it makes you feel better. I don’t give a damn about
you or what you do. Do what I tell you and you can live in a man’s
world. Go on the way you are and in that last split second before they
kick your brains in, you’ll admit I was right.”

“I’m glad you told me. It’s what I came here to find out,” Loolyo said
finally.

At the sound of a key in the lock Fritz sprang up and ran to the door.
It was Alma. Fritz took her packages and kissed her. While he was
kissing her she looked past him to the living room and Loolyo, and as
soon as he was finished she went and stood in the doorway. Fritz stood
behind her, watching. Loolyo raised his head slowly and saw her and
started and smiled shyly.

Fritz stepped up and took her shoulder and turned her around because
just then he had to see her face. When he saw it he gently bit his lower
lip and said, “Oh,” and went back to his chair. He was a man who
understood things real quick.

Alma ignored him, all eyes for Loolyo. “What has he been saying to you?”

He didn’t answer. He looked at the carpet. Fritz jumped up and rapped,
“Well, are you willing to tell the lady?”

“Why?”

“Promise me you will, every word, and I’ll let her take the car and give
you a lift out of town. You are from out of town? Yes. Well, I think you
owe it to each other. What do you say, Louie?”

“Fritz! Have you gone cr—”

“You better persuade him to play it that way, honey. It’s the last
chance you’ll have to see him alone.”

“Loolyo …” she whispered, “come on, then.”

Loolyo stared at the big man. Fritz grinned and said, “Every God damned
word, mind. I’ll quiz her when she gets back and take it out on her if
you don’t. Alma, try not to make it more’n two, three hours. Okay?”

“Come on then,” she said stiffly, and they went out. Fritz went and got
a beer and came back and flopped in the chair, drinking and laughing and
scratching his chest.

In the car he said only “Uptown, over the bridge,” and then fell into a
silence that lasted clear to the tollbooths. They turned north and at
last he began to talk. He told her all about it. She said nothing until
he had quite finished; then: “How could you let him suggest such a
filthy thing?”

He laughed bitterly. “Let him?… When he understand something,
that—is—it.”

There was nothing she could say to this; she knew it better than
anything in life. He said, “But I guess I’m a green monkey anyhow.
Well … I should be grateful. He told me where my kind can hide, and how
to act when we’re out in the open. I’d about given up.”

“What do you mean?” He would not answer her, but rode with his face
turned away. He seemed to be scanning the roadside to the right.

Suddenly: “Here,” he said. “Stop here.”

Startled, she pulled off the pavement and stopped. There’s a new parkway
north of the bridge, and for miles it parallels the old road. Between
them is a useless strip of land, mauled by construction machines, weedy
and deserted. She looked at it and at him, and if she was going to speak
again the expression on his face stopped her. It was filled with sadness
and longing and something else, a sort of blue-mood laughter. He said,
“I’m going home now.”

She looked at her hands on the wheel and suddenly could not see them. He
touched her arm and said gently, “You’ll have to get over it, Alma. It
can’t work. Nothing could make it work. It would kill you. Try to get
back with your husband. He’s better equipped for you. I’m not, not at
all.”

“Stop it,” she whispered. “Stop it, stop it.”

Loolyo sighed deeply, put his arms around her and kissed her, rough,
gentle, thorough, face, mouth, tongue, ears, neck, touching her body
hungrily while he did it. She clung to him and cried. He put her arms
from him and pressed something into her hand and vaulted out of the car,
ran across the shoulder, jumped over the retaining wall and disappeared.
It was only a low wall. He didn’t disappear behind anything or into
anything or in the distance. He just disappeared. She called him twice
and then got out and ran to the wall. Nothing—weeds, broken ground, a
bush or two. She wrung her hands and became conscious of the object he
had given her. It was a transparent disk, about like a plain flat
flashlight lens. She turned it over twice, then impulsively looked
through it.

She saw Loolyo crouched in a … machine.

She saw the machine leave, and when it was gone, her glass disc ceased
to exist also, so that she had nothing of his any more. For a while she
thought she could not survive that. And in its time came the thing known
to everyone who has had grief enough: that no matter what you’ve lost,
the lungs and the heart go on, and all around, birds fly, cars pass,
people make a buck and lose their souls and get hernia and happy and
their hair cut just like before.

When she came through the other side of this, it was quite a bit later.
She was weak and numb but she could drive again, so she did, very
carefully, and soon she was able to think again, so she did, just as
carefully, and by the time she got home her rehearsed “Hel-_lo!_” was
perfect and easy.

Maybe she forgot to rehearse her face. Fritz Rhys, shirtless, huge and
understanding, came up out of the big chair like a cresting wave of
muscles and kindliness. He took her hand and laughed quietly and brought
her to the couch. She cowered back into the corner cushions and just
sat, waiting for him to wash over her any way he wanted. He sat on the
edge of the couch close to her, leaning forward to wall her away from
the world, his heavy forearm and fist on the end table next to the
couch; single-handedly he surrounded her. “Alma …” he whispered, and
waited, waited, until at last she met his eyes.

“I’m not angry,” he told her. “Believe me, honey, I’m glad you
can … love someone that much. It only means you’re alive
and … compassionate and—Alma.” He laughed the quiet laugh again. “Of
course I’ll admit I’m glad he turned out to be a—one of the girls. I
don’t know what I’d do if you ever felt that way about a real man.”

Her eyes had been fixed on his all the while, and now she moved them,
let them drop to the heavy naked forearm that lay across the polished
wood of the end table. She watched it with increasing fascination as he
talked. “So let’s chalk up one for the statistical mind, namely me,
versus feminine intuition which sort of let you down. What are you
staring at?”

She was staring at the forearm. Almost in spite of herself she reached
for it. She didn’t answer. He said, “It could have been worse. Imagine
living with him. Imagine getting right to the point, drunk on poetry and
shiny hair, and just when you were … ah, why go on. It would be
impossible.”

“It was impossible,” she said in a low voice. She put her hand on his
forearm, looked up and saw him watching her, and snatched the hand away
self-consciously. She couldn’t seem to keep her eyes off his arm. She
began to smile, looking at it. He was a big man, and his forearm was
about seventeen inches long and perhaps five and a half inches thick.
“Quite impossible,” she murmured, “and that’s about the size of it.”
_Damn near exactly the size of it_, she thought wildly.

“Good girl!” he said heartily. “And now I’ll give you forty-eight hours
mooning time and then we’ll be—”

His voice trailed off weakly as he watched the wildness transfer itself
from somewhere inside her to her face and turn to laughter, floods,
arrows, flights, peals, bullets of laughter.

“Alma!”

Her laughter ceased instantly but left her lips curled and her eyes
glittering. “You better go back to killing the green monkeys,” she said
in a flat hard voice. “You’ve given them a beachhead.”

_“What?”_

“There’s something awfully small about you, Fritz Rhys,” she said, and
again the laughter, more and more of it, and he couldn’t croon it down,
he couldn’t shout it down, and he couldn’t stand it. He got dressed and
packed his bag and said from the door, into the blare and blaze of her
laughter, “I don’t understand you. I don’t understand you at all,” and
he went back to Washington.



THE POD IN THE BARRIER


A LOUSY MISSION. Of course, it was a volunteer (i.e. suicide) mission,
and for that you take what comes. They may wine you and dine you and
honor you and your tribe for three generations coming and going, in the
days before you start. But once you’re on your way, you can’t expect it
to be a pleasure. Everything about suicide is death, not just the final
part.

Potter pinched his nostrils and didn’t know he was doing it, even while
he was looking you straight in the eye, talking to you at the time. Try
shipping out with that. That’s what bothered me the most, anyway.

Most of the others seemed to be bugged by Donato. He had a psychosomatic
cough that passed all the preflight medics for the simple reason that he
had never had such a thing before, probably because he had never gone
out to die before. Me, I guess I have soaked up enough of the “profound
compassion” of the Luanae to defend me against that kind of annoyance.
But Potter the Pincher now—that got to me, I admit it.

Little Donato was always trying to please. Some people are annoying
because once in a while they just don’t go out of their way to make
things a little happier for anyone else. Donato hit the other extreme,
always making way, never disagreeing, forever finding some way to help
or get a cushion or move back or bring or say or not say whatever anyone
else might want, until you wanted to scuttle the ship just so it would
take him with the lot of you.

The main trouble was, he was so helpful he never gave you anything to
complain about. Time after time, I would see one or the other of the
crew suddenly wheel on him out of a dead silence and roar at him to get
the hell out.

“Why, sure, friend,” Donato would always say, and smile, and get the
hell out, leaving whoever it was beating himself on the temples.

Potter was a specialist in field mechanics and Donato was a top
ballistics man. England was an ugly man with big ears and wet eyes who
kept to himself pretty much, only he ate loud. He was an expert in
missile control. And I’m Palmer; I heard there was a man in Alpha Sigma
IV once who knew more about trans-spatial stress than I do, but I don’t
believe it.

The four of us had four different ideas for breaking the Luanae Barrier
and that’s what we were on our way to do. All four ideas were pretty
far-fetched and the odds were much in favor of the Barrier’s getting us,
but it had to be done. After everything reasonable has been tried on
something that must be done but can’t be done, you have to start calling
in the crackpots. I had to bring along my perfectly valid theories with
the three crackpots because it was the only way they would ever get
tried.

And that was the expedition personnel. The others were just operations.
A skipper, Capt. Steev, strictly ferryboat, who knew everything he had
to know about running the ship and getting her there, and didn’t know,
didn’t care, wouldn’t talk about anything else. Some of the others
griped about the kind of skipper we had, but not me. He had to be
expendable and he was. He had to know his job and he did. So?

The utility monkey was funny for about half an hour of anybody’s time,
and forever after that just unpleasant to have around. He was sort of
misshapen, with a head much too big for his body and a left leg with too
much bounce in it. It’s been so many hundreds of years, I guess, since
anyone had anything drastic wrong physically that nobody can get used to
it any more. You know how to be polite about it when you do encounter
it, and back home you know how to forget you saw it pretty thoroughly,
but on a spacecan you never get the chance.

Personally, I think we should have shipped without a utility man. I
don’t know if I feel so strongly about it that I’d have done the dirty
work on the ship myself, but maybe one of the others would. I don’t care
how much humanity progresses, there is always a little room somewhere
for the unskilled hand, lifting and mopping and cleaning out the sewer
lines when something gets stuck. This monkey we had went by the name of
Nils Blum, and nobody paid much attention to him.

And then we had the unemployed CG. Did you ever hear of an unemployed
crew’s girl—on a ship? I don’t mean kicking around the spaceports
waiting to ship out, unemployed that way. I mean right there aboard, she
had nothing to do.

CGs as a whole are a dowdy bunch. There’s no point in putting cute
clothes, cute tricks and heady perfume aboard a spacecan. You don’t need
to stimulate anything; that takes care of itself as time goes by. They
keep themselves clean and wait around till they’re needed. They’re a
thick-skinned, slow-witted lot because there’s no sense in sensitivity
in their line. It just makes trouble.

This Virginia we shipped, she came from the bottom of the underside of
the sump. She was everything that distinguishes a CG from a real
Earthside female woman. She had a wide face that was closed and bland as
a bank-vault door on the Sabbath, and a build that was neither this nor
that but sort of statistically there. With a normal personality, or none
at all, she might have had a job to do, and would have done it. But with
the personality she had …

Well, at first you just didn’t like her, and after a while you couldn’t
abide her, and finally you got the feeling about her that she was a
lower animal, that you couldn’t stand what the others might think of you
if you went near her. There was a lot of difference of opinion aboard on
a lot of subjects, but not on that one.

So that’s what we had, believe it or not, an unemployed CG.

I read someplace about an Arctic explorer back in the days where the
poles of Old Earth were covered with ice. He used to bring along the
ugliest woman he could find to cook. Her other function was to inform
him when he’s been away from civilization too long, which she did by
beginning to look good to him. Well, maybe, given time enough, we’d have
found something for this Virginia to do. But given that much time, we’d
all be dead.

Oh, she was a great help aboard, Virginia was.

That personality. I thought a lot about that personality of hers, just
because on a long haul you have time to think a lot about everything
 … I knew a kid in school who had a face so insulting, so all-fired
arrogant when it was relaxed that the teachers used to throw him out of
the class just for sitting there. At least until they learned it was
only physical and had him remodeled. Well, maybe Virginia’s personality
was something like that. Maybe she couldn’t help it.

She had a way of carrying a cloud of what Potter once called
“retroactive doubt.” When she was anywhere near you, you breathed it.
You’d say something and she would repeat it, and by the way she did it—I
can’t describe it at all, but I’m telling you the truth—by the way she
did it, she made whatever you’d said into a falsehood. Sometimes it
suddenly sounded like a lie and sometimes like a mistake and sometimes
like something you could be expected to believe because you were
ignorant. I mean just repeating your own words.

You’d say, “Back home, I’ve got a silver-headed walking stick,” and
she’d say, “Yeah, you’ve got a silver-headed walking stick,” in that
dull flat drone of hers, and, by damn, you’d find yourself arguing with
her that you _did_ have one. I mean fighting, defending yourself, the
way you only can when you doubt something yourself. Then she’d go away
and you’d sit and stew about the walking stick, wondering where it was
you last saw it, wondering if you actually did have it any more, if the
head of it was real silver.

It didn’t have to be something that was important at all; she could make
you feel that way. When it _was_ important … shipmate, better not
mention it around her. I think you could tell her your name and she’d
make you doubt it.

As a matter of fact, now I think of it, she did just that to me, the day
I first saw her (which is traditionally the day after upship). I walked
up to her in the mess hall and said, “My name’s Palmer,” and she looked
at me without blinking and said flatly, “Your name’s Palmer,” and made
me say, before I could stop myself, “No—really it is,” and then skulk
off feeling damn strange.

We’d taken off with a null-grav tug and slipped into second-order matrix
within six hours—all very fast and painless, thanks to the Luanae. Both
devices were theirs, and so was the ship’s power plant, and so was the
sub-etheric communication we could get loud and clear for almost four
full days after upship. Do you know how far that would be in miles?
Here, figure it out—four days is enough to take you halfway to Sirius,
and that’s a powerful long reach for a communicator phasing out of
normal space and finding your receiver.

I recall especially that fourth day’s bulletins, because we all gathered
around to soak them up and chew them thoroughly. We knew that we’d hear
nothing else from Earth Worlds from there on for the six ship-weeks it
took us to get out to the Luanae Barrier, way out on the other side of
the Coalsack.

We cheered the whiffleball scores and the chess results and laughed too
loud at the human-interest bit about the kid who brought the Nova Mars
stinkdog into school; and then there was the last real news we heard,
that Chicago had been frozen from Northern Ontario Parish clear south to
the Joplin city limits, back on Old Earth.

Everybody tsk-tsked.

“Well,” said Potter, looking at his finger, “I guess there’s no other
way.”

“But people always get killed in a freeze,” said big-eared England.

“More people get killed in a riot,” I remember saying.

About then, the signal faded, very abruptly, as it does when you get out
of range in sub-space, and we all sat around worrying a bit.

It was funny, that news of all news being the last we heard. It was like
a nudge, a send-off. A reminder.

Old Earth wasn’t the only place where there were riots, not by a sight.
Of eighteen planets in the two so-called Earth Galaxies, only Ragnarok
and Luna-Luna were not bulging at the seams, and they’d be as bad as the
others in a generation. By and large, people behaved themselves … but
there were so _many_ of them! The law of averages dictated that, in that
number, there had to be so many troublemakers, and there were bound to
be so many riots—and there had to be more troublemakers and riots all
the time.

Unless we broke the Luanae Barrier.

We owe the Luanae a lot. As I said before, a good deal of our most
advanced technology is built on transmissions from the Luanae. A very
old people, ancient before old Sol the First was a sun. Wise and
compassionate. That was the real cliché: the compassionate Luanae. True
enough, though.

No one had ever seen them, of course—the Barrier took care of that. No
one understood the exact method of their transmissions, though they
tried their best to explain. You’d get in range and then there it was,
they were talking to you, inside your head. What they said was true—that
you could bank on, swear by, hang your hat or your life on.

Some things have to be proved. But not anything the Luanae said. You
might not believe it if you heard about something they said, from me,
say. But go hear it from them—you’ll _know_ it’s so. Never in the three
hundred years of contact had anything they said turned out to be
anything but exactly—really exactly—so.

They say that at first humanity took it with a dose of salts—we are a
suspicious species. But although the Luanae couldn’t give us the specs
of a machine like theirs—they insisted that their thought transmitter
was only a machine—they were able to describe an odd little recorder
that would play back and “sound” like the original. When a few million
of those had been made and distributed, there wasn’t any suspicion any
more. It just blew away.

But population-pressure rioting isn’t as easy to dispose of as inbred
suspicion. Put enough people in a limited area and you’ll have trouble.
Put too much in the same area and—look out. Now we had sixteen worlds
with too much humanity, and two more with almost enough to start
trouble. And all we could do was watch and feel, and freeze whole
sections when the thing boiled over.

After each freeze, the United Planet men would spread through the
countryside, picking up the mangled corpses from ground-cars and
aircraft which had smashed up when everyone blacked out, and making the
millions of others comfortable where they lay. They’d wake up in due
course, with no sense of time passed, but the dead would have been long
buried and the troublemakers located and treated, and the immediate
causes of the riot, whatever they might be (it didn’t take much)
adjudicated and put right.

It was generally suspected that the UP boys declared riot and froze
sections on somewhat less excuse than they really needed, but most
people didn’t object. At least it kept a few million people, each time,
from breeding any more for six to eight months. But nobody denied that
this was pure stopgap.

As to halting reproduction altogether for a while, the suggestion came
up monotonously in the Council sessions and was as monotonously knocked
down. Enforced sterility is counter to the most basic of civil rights,
and the Earth Worlds would die before they would relinquish any basic
right.

They were dying, too.

And there, hanging just out of reach, were the Luanae Earths—eight fine
Earth-type planets circling three suns in Galaxy Three. Eight beautiful
worlds, ready and waiting; we wanted them and the Luanae wanted us to
have them. And all we could do was watch them swing by and feel wistful,
because of the Barrier.

The Luanae are not terrestrial. As far as can be understood, they have a
boron metabolism and compete in no way with us hydrocarbon types. They
need nothing from us and wouldn’t take it if they did need it.

When they say they have those worlds to give us, when they say the
worlds are suitable, and they say for sure that those are the only
planets left in this entire quadrant of the Universe—why, you can bet on
it. (They’re the ones who found Luna-Luna and Ragnarok for us, when the
Earth Worlds had despaired of ever finding another terrestrial planet.)
We also have their assurance that in the other quadrants are literally
thousands of terrestrial planets; but we will need a totally new
technology to reach them, and that will take us maybe four centuries to
acquire, even with their help.

Well, the Earth Worlds wouldn’t last four centuries without the Luanae
planets. With them, though—with them, it might be done. All we had to do
was reach them. All we had to do was penetrate the Barrier.

The Barrier was a sphere in space—not a thing, exactly, just a place
which could be represented on a cosmimap as a sphere. It was a
fair-sized sphere; it englobed a third of the Luanae Galaxy, including,
of course, the three little Luanae home-planets and the eight lovely,
unreachable Luanae Earths.

All it did, that Barrier, was to draw a line. Anything outside of it was
left strictly alone. Anything penetrating it was instantly tracked,
hunted and smashed by Luanae missiles. And anything that got cute enough
to duck inside and out again was destroyed by the Barrier itself, which
had the simple ability of reversing the terrene-sign of a random third
of the atoms in any matter it touched.

You can imagine what happened to anything from a micrometeorite to a sun
that got exposed to it. Shot through and through with contra-terrene
matter. Disappeared in a single ferocious flash.

The Luanae Galaxy was discovered three hundred years ago by a creaky old
Earth survey ship powered by Teller-formula atomics and a primitive
subspace drive which barely quadrupled effective light-velocity.

The first thing the ship—it was called the _Luanae_, after its skipper’s
wife and daughter, both of whom were named Luana—the first thing they
saw was the Luanae Galaxy, a long narrow elliptical one with a dark
band, the perfect arc of a circle, a third of the way down the long
axis. It looked artificial, so they hobbled over there to investigate.

It was artificial, all right. It was the Barrier, or, rather, the
segment of space through which the Barrier had removed all impinging
matter. And when they got within a dozen light-years of it, they were in
range of the beings who came to be known by the same name as the ship
and the galaxy—the Luanae.

They said _Stop_.

They said it simultaneously inside the heads of everyone aboard. They
said it with that encasement of utter truth and total believability.
They said it (they told us later) with an automatic machine set up eons
ago, to warn away any intelligent life from their Barrier. But when the
ship Luanae responded (by stopping), it wasn’t any machine that spoke
next. The strange creatures set up such a welcome, such a warm,
admiring, congratulatory flood of thought that they say all hands looked
at each other in amazement and started to weep.

And along with the welcome—a warning. _Don’t come any closer_.

They threw a few million cubic meters of rubble up from the inside of
the Barrier and let the astonished crew watch the near margins of the
invisible Barrier light up with a hellish three-hour show of
destruction. They urged experiment, suggesting that the survey ship
throw something at the Barrier.

The ship did. Whatever matter penetrated was overtaken and destroyed by
what appeared to be tiny hunting missiles. Whatever matter was angled
through the Barrier’s skin, so that it would cut a chord and emerge
again, splashed into flame as it left. The men on the ship knew, down to
the marrow, that they were welcome—thirstily, ardently welcome.

And they knew that they were warned.

The ship hung outside the Barrier for over a year, setting down what
turned out to be the greatest treasure ever brought home by a vessel
since time began. Knowledge—the knowledge that put cold-fusion power
plants on all the Earth planets, in all the factories. New designs. New
principles of mathematics and spatial mechanics. New methods, new ideas,
much of it material Earth possibly might have discovered for itself in a
thousand years, most of it material we never could have found unaided.

And every bit of it was valid. Every bit of it held out the promise of
more, once we had assimilated this incredible cargo.

When the survey ship _Luanae_ reached the Earth Worlds, they say that
the suspicion was thicker than anyone alive today could readily
understand. They say they were going to court-martial the skipper for
wasting all that time out there making up stories. And they say there
was a powerful movement to suppress everything they brought back, out of
fear that the new technology might in some way be a Trojan horse.

But sheer cussed human curiosity got the better of all that and, though
they started slowly, it wasn’t too long before the Luanae devices and
principles proved themselves out—spectacularly.

And in a few years, humanity was back again. In force. The main idea was
to breach the Barrier—peaceably if possible, but breach it. Most of the
ships, most of the men, did not make the attempt, so great was the
impact of the Luanae truth and fellow feeling.

Some did try, though, ramming, bombing, bringing up hyper-magnetic
generator ships to try warping the intangible structure of the Barrier.
All failed; those who touched it died. Whenever that happened, there was
a great soundless cry of mourning from the Luanae, but the Barrier
remained.

When the survey ship discovered them, the Luanae had explained simply
and clearly why the Barrier was there and why it stayed. It seemed too
simple a story, and buried as it was in such a mass of other data, it
was overlooked or disbelieved. Mind you, that was before the Luanae had
been recorded, before the human millions could “hear” for themselves
what a transmission from them was really like. Probably the Luanae
realized this; at any rate, the story of the Barrier was the first
Luanae recording to be widely distributed and its impact was huge.

_Such_ a simple story … a people in some ways like humanity, perhaps a
little swifter technologically, perhaps in some ways less
demanding … well, they lived a good deal longer, took a good deal less
from the land to keep themselves alive.

They had some things to be proud of—an art that can only be imagined
outside the Barrier, and music of a kind. They did “send” some of their
literature, as you know … ah.

They had a number of things to be ashamed of. Some wars, big ones. Three
times they all but destroyed themselves, and climbed back up again. Then
there was a long flowering, which seemed like something good, something
fine. They developed a compassion, a philosophy of respect for the
living and harmony with the laws of the Universe—more than a religion,
more than simply a way of life and thought. Through it, a good many
things became unnecessary to them and they forgot they had hands …

When they were attacked from space (this happened countless thousands of
years ago), they could not defend themselves at all. They had forgotten
the largest part of their fabulous technology; their machines were
corroded, their skills had died, and worst of all, they had forgotten
how to organize, how to be many men under one man’s hand—for the
duration.

So they were enslaved.

They broke their chains at length—at some thirty thousand years’ length.
When they had driven out the invader, and followed him and destroyed him
and all his worlds, they were a frightened and sobered people. Their
taste of quiet, of personal and individual fulfillment, was a touch of
paradise to them and they deeply resented its loss.

Their return to material power was (in their minds) a descent and a
degradation. Yet they had learned a lesson and learned it well. They
made up their minds to defend themselves in such a way that never
again—positively, absolutely and forever—never again would they be
attacked, no matter how long it might be, no matter how deep and
distantly they buried their souls in their nameless, nebulous delights.

So, after due consideration, they decided on the Barrier. They threw
their total productivity—enormous, after their last war—and all their
ingenuity into a defense to end all defenses. They marked out a segment
of the surrounding space, purposely enclosing ten times the volume which
their computers specified as the most that they could conceivably ever
need for themselves.

They built a planetoid and stabilized it in an orbit around a dead sun
not far from their cultural hub. This control planetoid, in ways as yet
far too advanced for humanity to grasp, generated and maintained the
Barrier itself. In addition, it gathered up cosmic debris and sucked it
in and, with its mammoth automatic machinery, transmuted and smelted and
cast and machined flight after flight of missiles—large and small. These
were racked and stored by the hundreds of thousands, stationed
throughout the Barrier-protected space in a myriad of automatically
computed orbits.

And so it was that anything which penetrated the Barrier, from any
quarter, was instantly hunted down and killed.

There was some alarm at first over the fact that the Barrier, by its
nature, must destroy anything leaving, as the missiles destroyed
everything entering. But there seemed no valid answer to the question
“Why not?” The Luanae weren’t going anywhere. They had space enough, and
ten times space enough, for any roaming they chose to do. And they chose
to do very little, for their orientation was back toward those golden
years of introspection, of contemplative, inward self-realization, and
their hunger for it was very great.

And so they locked the Universe out and themselves in—

And threw away the key.

The control planetoid was a machine—automatic, self-repairing, powered
by cold fusion of two isotopes of hydrogen, and it could always get
hydrogen. It made missiles and used them. When it used them, it gathered
up the dust that was left and salvaged it and made more. When any
outbound matter was destroyed by the inner surface of the Barrier, it
gathered up the radiant energy of the pyre, and the ashes, and brought
them in and used them. It was impregnable, inexhaustible, tireless and
immortal. It brought safety; it brought peace.

It brought death to a nomad people, so vastly superior in intellect and
in what has been translated from the Luanae “sendings” as “size-of-soul”
that the Luanae, by that time steeped again in their unthinkable
metaphysics, awoke to watch them approach, awestruck, alive and aware of
them. What they were can never now be known. Even the Luanae do not
know. They say only that their thirty thousand years of slavery to the
creatures who invaded them was but a scratch, a toe-stub, compared to
the wound they suffered in the realization that they caused the
destruction of these nameless nomads.

The creatures swept down on the Barrier, unable to detect something
unique in the Universe, unwarned and unprepared, and were swallowed up
by it.

It is impossible to describe the impact of this event on the Luanae.
Already deeply involved in their ancient philosophy, in tune with the
Universe and respecting all natural things—compassionate, life-reverent,
humble and kind—they watched the destruction of their infinite superiors
with an infinite horror. They realized then the extent of their folly,
their crime in the creation of the Barrier.

Already far gone again away from their technological peak, they again
restored it. They surpassed it. They mobilized to pull down what they
had put up, driven by guilt and horror at the thing they had done. It
was the crucifixion of crucifixions, the murder of murders with the
Messiah of Messiahs their irreplaceable victim.

And they failed. They had built too well. The planetoid destroyed
everything that approached it. It was surrounded by miniature versions
of the great Barrier, some turned inside out so that the disintegrating
surface was encountered first. It picked apart, in a microsecond,
everything they threw at it, ate it, digested it, and was nourished.

The Luanae then undertook a frightening sacrifice, an appalling expense.
In an effort to overload the planetoid’s defenses, they flung up
thousands of missiles, ships, lumps of rock and debris, hurling it every
which way between their stars and planets. Implacably the planetoid
located the intrusive matter, compared it with its matrix of stored
information on allowable bodies and their permitted circlings, and
sought out and destroyed the offending ones, quite uncaring that many of
them, tragically many, were manned …

And, in time, the Luanae discovered that that planetoid was producing
missiles and energy past its original capacity, consuming more than it
had originally been designed to handle, computing more things more
quickly. At that, they ceased to attack it, realizing belatedly that
they had forced it to enlarge and strengthen itself—the only course open
to a self-repairing machine stressed beyond its original endurance.

They fell back then on the only thing left for them to do, as creatures
of efficient conscience. They sent out warnings.

They devised transmissions which covered the entire spectra of
intelligence, transcending language, surpassing even symbolism. They set
up automatic beacons to radiate the warning in all directions, each beam
overlapping the next. Bitterly, they organized a trade of monitors to
watch over the automatic machines, which they never again would trust.
The monitors were ritualized like a priesthood, drilled like
slave-legions, marinated in the impulses of duty.

Once that was done and tested past any conceivable fault or failure,
they settled to a new level of life, neither blindly mechanical, like
that which had produced the planetoid, nor vegetative and contemplative,
like that which had left them open to slavery, but a middle ground,
based on the ancient convictions of respect for life and its ways in the
rigid and marvelous frame of the Universe; and implemented by an
untrusting technology.

So it was that the Luanae were at last in a position to make their
greatest and most mature discovery—a thing known to each of them as
individuals, but until now unrealized in terms of lifegroups:

A man cannot exist alone. He must be a member of something, a piece, an
integer of some larger whole. Men plus men make cities, which band
together to form states, then countries, then worlds, and never can a
sole unit exist alone and unsupplied. Communication and intercourse are
necessary and vital; without them, the lone unit is a brief accident
unnoticed by the Universe and forever forgotten.

So, behind their gigantic ghastly barricade, the Luanae at last
acknowledged membership in a grouping greater than species, and declared
themselves belonging to Life and dedicated to the survival of its total
membership.

This, then, was the self-imprisoned people discovered by an Earth scout
ship, in the business of locating terrestrial planets for humanity. The
Luanae rose with a shout at the sight of them. This was Life—life to aid
and life to share. For until Earth came to them, they saw themselves
dying like a surrounded city, like a lone traveler, like an amputated
limb, like any other life separated from its sustaining body.

Earth brought life to the Luanae, and the Luanae enlisted themselves in
Earth’s search for life.

A lousy trip. A suicide trip, with a skipper and utility monkey
horse-blindered by their duties, three crackpots and an unemployed and
unusable CG. And me, Palmer, with what could be the answer.

I had faith in my solution; I liked its math. I had little or no hope
that it would be tried—really tried full-scale, and done right. People
don’t know enough. They don’t think really straight. They turn the wrong
valves and push the wrong buttons. Palmer should have a thousand hands
and the ability to be simultaneously in a thousand places. Then this
business of being the wasp-waist in the history of Life and the Lives of
the two cultures—this would make more sense.

I shall be bungled out of history, I told myself as we ground along in
the nothingness of subspace—the Luanae subspace, given us by Luanae
cold-fusion generators. I’m coming, I’m coming, I told the Luanae
silently, but I bring the enemy; I bring bungling; and, my marvels,
you’ll succumb to stupidity as will I, for it’s the last and strongest
enemy of them all, against which you and I might not prevail.

I watched Potter pinching away at his nose tip, and I silently bore
Donato’s cough, and I gave my approval to big-eared England because he
had so little to say to anybody; I tried to remember what exactly it was
that made Nils Blum, the utility monkey, funny to me when I saw him
first; I hoped to recapture it and laugh again, but I never made it. I
swore sometimes at Donato’s eternal helpfulness and I ignored the
skipper, because who wants to talk all the screaming time about ship’s
business and the business of ships gone by?

 … I said nothing where the CG could hear me, and tightened up in
painful empathy when I saw one or another of the ship’s company
floundering and defending and doubting when she repeated his words.

I did nothing about any of these annoyances, except maybe the time I
suggested to the skipper that he feed the CG at times other than our
mess, so I wouldn’t have to witness her purposeless wreckage of even the
little things men believe in. He bought that, and it had a double
advantage. We not only were spared the sight of her at meals, but she
took to spending her time aft in the “monkey’s cage” among the mops and
drums of cleaning aerosol and sewer-line scrapers. If Nils Blum
objected, then, monkeylike, he could pass it off by scratching and
chewing a straw.

 … I came through there once and saw them sitting across from each other
at Blum’s little table, elbows almost touching, not speaking and not
looking at each other. And, by the Lord, she was crying, and I must say
it did me good. I had a mind to go ask the monkey how he managed it, but
I don’t involve myself with the unskilled.

We got where we were going and snapped out of the nothing into the
something. We took a bearing on the Luanae Galaxy and it was quite a
sight, a long irregular sausage of an island galaxy, with its
unmistakable signpost, the long regular black swatch of the Barrier’s
edge where it impinged on, and shut out, the rest of the bodies in the
formation. We ducked under again for half an hour and came up again too
close to see the swatch, but close enough at last to get the Luanae
greeting.

That I can’t tell you about.

Captain Steev piped us all into the mess hall in midmorning,which would
have annoyed me if I could think of anything I’d rather be doing—but
there just wasn’t anything to do, or to want to do, instead. So I
shuffled in with the rest of them—Potter, England, Donato. Blum and the
CG were back with the mops, I imagine. The captain let us all be seated
and stood at the end of the table and knocked on a coffee mug
self-consciously.

He said, “We have arrived at our site of operations. We have, among the
four of you, four different specialists with, as I understand it, four
attacks on the problem of penetrating the Luanae Barrier. I need not,”
he says, and then went right on as if he needed to anyway, “need not
tell you of the vital importance of this task. The entire history of
humanity might—not might, _does_—depend on it. If you, or men like you,
fail to solve this problem soon, we can expect our entire civilization
to explode, like a dying sun, through the internal pressures of its own
contracting mass.”

He coughed to cover up the floridity of his phrasing, and little Donato
happily joined in. I saw one of England’s wide flat hands move on the
table, to cover the other and hold it down.

“Now, then,” said the captain. He bent from the waist and removed his
hand from his side pocket. In it was a sleek little remote mike. “This
is for the record, gentlemen. You first, Mr. Palmer?”

“Me first what?” I wanted to know.

“Your plan, sir. Your approach, attack, whatever it pleases you to call
it. Your projected method of cracking the Barrier.”

I looked around at what passed for an audience, coughing, picking,
glowering wetly.

I said, “In the first place, my plan has been fully detailed and filed
with the proper authorities—men who are in a position to understand my
specialty. I believe that copies of these papers are on file with you. I
suggest that you look at them and save us both the trouble.”

“I’m afraid you don’t understand,” said the captain, looking flustered.
He gestured at the mike. “This is for the record. I’ve got to have the
oral rundown. It’s—it’s—well, for the record.”

“Then I say to the recording, for the record,” I barked, right into the
mike, “that I am not accustomed to being asked to make speeches before a
lay audience, which cannot be expected to understand one word in ten of
what I have to say. And I refer the recording and its auditors, whoever
they may be, to the files in which my detailed report is presented, for
proof not only of my project but of the fact that these assembled, and
no doubt those listening to this record, would in all likelihood not
know what I was talking about. Not at all.”

I glared up at the skipper. “Does that satisfy the record, Lieutenant?”

“Captain,” corrected the captain mildly. “Really.”

“A mistake,” I allowed. “I never make mistakes accidentally, you
understand.” I waved at the mike. “Let’s let the record stand with that,
do you mind?”

“Mr. Potter,” said the captain, and I leaned back, pleased with myself.

Potter removed and immediately replaced his perennial pinch. “Well I
don’t bind telling you bine,” he said adenoidally. “I’m in field
bechanics, as you dough. I have bade certain calculations which indicate
that the stresses present in the barrier skin are subject on bobentary
distortion under the stress of sball area, high intenstidty focused
bagnetic fields of about one hudred billion gauss per square centimeter
at focus. That’s _billion_,” he amended, “dot _billion_.”

I wondered how the record would make out the difference.

“Very good, Mr. Potter,” said the captain. “Unless I am mistaken, you
propose to breach the Barrier momentarily with a high-intensity focused
magnetic field. Is that correct?”

Potter nodded, a gesture which carried through his right wrist.

“Very well,” said the captain.

I blew disgustedly through my nostrils, looking at Potter. His business
was as disgusting as his hobby of picking at his cuticles. If I knew as
little about my specialty as he did about his, I’d never get trapped
into talking about it.

“Mr. Donato?”

“Yes, Captain Steev, yes, sir!” Donato cried, all blushes and eagerness.
“Well, sir, I’m in ballistics. What I propose is a two-part missile
aimed to graze the Barrier in such a way that, at the moment of contact,
it separates, one segment glancing back outside, the other entering and
proceeding inward. This is on the theory that, although the control
planetoid reacts instantaneously, its sensors report only one event at
one locality at a given moment. I feel I have a fifty-fifty chance,
then, of slipping one part through while the other part is reported,
grazed and gone. I think a minimum of one hundred thirty shots, fired in
four groups and at four slightly different approach angles, would
establish whether or not the theory is tenable.”

“Tenable?” I gasped. “Why, you—nincompoop!” That’s the first time in my
entire life I ever called anyone that, but as I looked at him, blushing
and grinning and wanting to do right, there just wasn’t another
applicable term. “What makes you think—”

“Mr. England?” said the skipper, much louder than I have ever heard him
speak before.

I confess I was startled. Before I could quite recover myself, England
answered.

“In the area of mis,” he said in a whispery voice which at that point
failed him. He swallowed with all his might and then made a weak,
flickery smile. “In the field of missiles, my chief concern is, first, a
series of tests to determine the exact nature of the internal control
pulses in the hunting missiles, the frequency and wave height of the
command pulses in the guided missiles, with a view to jamming or
redirecting them. Second, I plan to lob some solids through the Barrier
at low velocities in order to study the metallurgical content of the
missiles, with a view to the design of sensor-dodging equipment, and
possibly some type of repulsion field, designed to force the missiles
into a near miss.”

“Very succinct,” said the captain, and I wondered how he knew what was
succinct or not about a specialty. “Now that we’ve got the swing of this
little discussion, perhaps, Mr. Palmer, you would like to reconsider and
join it.”

“Perhaps I would at that,” I said, stopping to think it over.

After all, a little sense ought to be added to this exhibition of
maundering incompetence, if only for balance.

“Then if you must know,” I said, “the only tenable method of approaching
the problem lies in the area of explosive stress. No one but myself
seems to have noticed the almost perfectly spherical shape of the
Barrier. A sphere in any flexing material is a certain indication of
some dynamic tension, a container and the contained in equilibrium, with
the analog of some fluid differential like the air inside and outside an
inflated balloon. You don’t follow me.”

“Go on,” said the captain, holding his head as if he was listening.

“Why, all it will take is a toroidal mass equipped with a subspace
generator and an alternator. If this is placed upon the Barrier margin
and caused to vibrate into and out of the subspace state, there will be
a portion of the Barrier—that which is surrounded by the toroid—which
will be included in the vibration. The effect then is in causing a
circular section of the Barrier to be in nonexistence for part of the
time. It is my conclusion that this small breach will cause the Barrier
to collapse like that toy balloon I mentioned. Q.E.D. Lieutenant.” I
leaned back.

“Captain,” said the captain tiredly. Then he looked me in the eye and
said, “I regret to inform you, Mr. Palmer, that you are completely
wrong. Blum!” he bellowed suddenly. “Coffee out here!”

“Hah!” came the monkey’s voice. It was as near as he ever let himself
get to aye-aye, sir.

He must have had the tray ready before the skipper called, because he
came out with it loaded and steaming. He set it down in the middle of
the table and retired to a corner. At the side of my eye, I saw the CG
sidle out of the “cage” and go to stand silently beside him.

But I wasn’t in a mood for anything but this preposterous allegation
from the captain. I got to my feet so I could look down at him.

“Did I understand you to say,” I ground out, cold as Neptune, “that in
_your_ opinion _I_ am wrong?”

“Quite wrong. The Barrier is a position, an infinite locus, not a
material substance, and is therefore not subject to the laws and
treatments of matter per se.”

I have been known to splutter when I am angry, unless I try not to. I
found myself trying very hard not to.

“I have reduced every observation on that surface known to Man,” I
informed him, “to mathematical symbology, and from it have written a
consecutive sequence of occasions which proves beyond doubt that the
surface is as I say and will act as I say. You seem to forget that this
is on the record, Admiral, and this may mean you are making a permanent
rather than a temporary fool of yourself.”

I sat down, feeling better.

“Captain,” said the captain wearily.

He turned and took a paper from the stack of folders which I noticed for
the first time lay there. He flashed it; at first glance, it looked like
a page of figures over which a child superimposed a crude and scratchy
picture of a Christmas tree in red.

He said, “Equation number 132, four pi sigma over theta plus the square
root of four pi sigma quantity squared.” I could not help noticing that,
as he reeled it off, he was waving the paper, not reading from it.

I said, “I recognize the equation. Well?”

“Well nothing,” snapped the captain. “Unwell, I’d call it. Heh.” He slid
the sheet over to me. “If you will observe, to be consistent with the
preceding series, the integer sigma is not whole but factorial, in view
of which an increasing error is introduced wherein—but see for
yourself.”

I looked. What resembled a crude picture of a Christmas tree was the
correction, in red, of the symbol he had mentioned, and the scrawled
figures of three corrected factors in the next equation and seven in the
third following, until the red marks became a whole line.

I said, “Might I ask who has had the effrontery to scribble all over
these calculations?”

“Oh, I did,” said the captain. “I thought it might be a good idea to
rework the whole series, just in case, and I’m glad I did. You ought to
be, too.”

I looked again at the sheet and swallowed sand. A man has to major for a
considerable time in some highly creative math to be able to do what had
been done here. A thing or two came to my lips, but I would not say
them, because they were for my figures and against his, yet it could not
be denied that his were right.

To save something out of this, I growled at him, “I think, sir, you owe
me an explanation as to why you have chosen publicly to humiliate me.”

“I didn’t humiliate you. Those figures humiliated you, and they’re your
figures,” he said, and shrugged.

I glanced at Potter and England. They were grinning broadly. I looked up
suddenly and caught the CG’s flat gray stare.

“They’re your figures,” she murmured, and anyone hearing her would swear
she knew for certain that I had copied them from somebody else’s work.
There was such a flame of insistence burning up in me that they were
_so_ my figures that I could barely contain it. But contain it I did;
they were not figures I was anxious to claim at the moment.

I was very confused. I slumped down in my chair.

“You’re next, Mr. Potter. I’m sorry to have to inform you that although,
in theory, the Barrier does yield under the stress of a magnetic field
such as you describe, it would take a generator somewhat larger than
this ship to supply it; the affected area would be just about what you
said—a square centimeter; and, finally, it wouldn’t be a hole in the
Barrier, but what you might call a replacement patch. In other words,
the affected area will, when surrounded by the so-called Barrier skin,
act precisely like part of that skin in all respects.”

Potter put his hobby finger out for inspection and was so distressed he
forgot to look at it. “Are … are you sure?”

“That’s what happened the last seven times it was tried.”

Potter made a wordless sound, a sort of moan, or sigh. I did not feel
like grinning at him as he had at me. England did not grin, either,
because I think he realized what was coming. He just sat there wondering
how it would come.

It came at Donato first. “Mr. Donato—”

“Yes, _sir_, Cap’n.”

“You propose a two-piece missile. You seem to forget, as many another
has before you, that the Barrier offers no resistance to penetration and
therefore needs no complicated hanky-panky to get something inside. In
addition, it’s unimportant whether or not an object is sensed by the
skin and reported to control, or whether it’s picked up a minute or hour
later by one of the hunting missiles. You’ve attacked the whole problem
with a view to getting something inside, which isn’t a problem, and
overlooked what to do inside, which is.”

“Oh, Cap’n, I’m sorry,” said Donato, stricken. He burst into a sharp
series of barking coughs. There were tears in his eyes. “Oh, I’m sorry.
I’m sorry.”

“Nothing to be sorry about,” the captain said. “Got it yet, Mr.
England?”

“Whuh? Oh,” said the missile expert. “I guess I was off base about the
jamming. Suddenly it seems to me that’s so obvious, it must have been
tried and it doesn’t work.”

“Right, it doesn’t. That’s because the frequency and amplitude of the
control pulses make like purest noise—they’re genuinely random. So
trying to jam them is like trying to jam F.M. with an A.M. signal. You
hit it so seldom, you might as well not try.”

“What do you mean, random? You can’t control anything with random
noise.”

The captain thumbed over his shoulder at the Luanae Galaxy. “They can.
There’s a synchronous generator in the missiles that reproduces the
_same random noise_, peak by pulse. Once you do that, modulation’s no
problem. I don’t know _how_ they do it. They just do. The Luanae can’t
explain it; the planetoid developed it.”

England put his head down almost to the table. “The same random,” he
whispered from the very edge of sanity.

As if anxious to push him the rest of the way, the captain said
cheerfully, “Good thinking on that proposal to study the metal content
of the missiles. Only there isn’t any. They’re a hundred percent
dielectric synthetics—God knows exactly what. The planetoid can
transmute, you know. What little circuitry the missiles have is laid out
in fluid-filled pipes, capillary coils, things like that. There seems to
be some sort of instantaneous transition from solid to liquid and back.
The liquid conductors are solid dielectrics again just as soon as they
have passed whatever current they’re supposed to pass, and that’s done
in microseconds.”

“Radar-transparent,” concluded England dolefully.

“For all practical purposes,” agreed the captain. “Well, that seems to
be that, gentlemen.”

“Just you tell me one thing,” I said before I could stop myself.
“Precisely what in hell are we doing here at all?”

“Precisely what you came to do.” The captain picked up his folders.
“Blum, I sense that these four gentlemen might be happier without an
audience, even us.”

“Come on, Virginia.”

The captain started out forward and the monkey and the CG headed aft. We
all sat where we were.

After a time, England said, “Why didn’t he tell me he knew so much about
missiles?”

“Did you ask him?” snapped Potter.

That was the question and answer I had been humbly formulating, too. I
said, “What did he mean, we are here to do what we came to do?”

“Maybe he wants us to get oriented, is all,” said Donato sheepishly.
“Get off theory, you know. Like field work.”

“If he thinks he’s jolting my inspiration, he’s crazy,” gloomed England.
He wiped his wet eyes with the backs of his hands, leaving them still
wet. “The jolt, I got all right. The inspiration, I can’t find.”

“He should have told us before, right at the start. Maybe by now we’d
have a whole new set of figures.” Donato caught my sharp look and
immediately said, “Theories, I mean, friend. I didn’t mean to say
figures.”

Somehow that didn’t help.

“Get out of here, Donato,” I said.

“Sure, friend, sure,” he said and got out like always, smiling. He went
into his room and closed the door. We could hear him coughing.

“Like a box you have in your room ten years,” Potter was muttering
adenoidally, “it all of a sudden goes boing and there’s a jumpid-jack.”
I was going to ask him what he was talking about and then realized he
was talking about the captain. I saw his point. Why _hadn’t_ he called
this meeting weeks ago?

“He must like things to look futile,” I said. “I’m going back to bed.”

“Be, too,” said Potter.

I got up. Potter and England stayed where they were. They were going to
talk about me.

I just didn’t care.

I dreamed I was walking in a meadow, smelling the sweet fresh odor of
snowdrops, when all of a sudden they grew taller and taller, or I grew
smaller and smaller, and I saw that instead of stems, the snowdrops were
growing on a sequence of equations. I began to read them off, but they
got all twisted and jumbled and started to grab at my feet. I fell and
grunted and caught hard at the edges of the bunk and was totally awake.

I turned over and looked at the overhead. I felt clear-headed but
lethargic. I thought I could still smell the snowdrops.

Then I noticed the whine. It was far away, but persistent. The lights
looked funny. They seemed to be flickering slightly, but when you looked
straight at them, they were steady. I didn’t like it. It made me feel
dizzy.

I got up and went out into the corridor. Nobody was around. Then a timid
voice said behind me, “Virginia in there?”

I jumped and turned. It was the monkey, cringing against the bulkhead.

“You think I’m _that_ bad off?” I answered him in disgust, but as I
turned away, he leaned forward and peered into my room anyway.

I went into the mess hall and knocked on the decanter and, when it
steamed, poured coffee. Somewhere in the background, I heard a wistful
murmur, and then Potter’s shocked voice: “In _here?_ Monkey, didn’t they
tell you? I like _girls_.” In a moment, he came shuffling in and headed
for the coffee. “What time is it, Palmer?”

I shrugged. I looked at the clock, but it didn’t seem to make any sense
to me.

“God,” said Potter, and sniffed noisily. “I feel all … disconnected. I
got a buzzing in my ears. My eyes—it’s sort of flickery.”

I looked at him curiously, wondering what it must be like to be a man
who readily relates everything around him to himself. “That isn’t your
flicker. It’s ours. Same with the buzz, though I’d call it a sort of
whine.”

He looked very relieved. “You hear it, too. What happened here, anyway?”

I drank some coffee and looked at the clock again. “What’s the matter
with that clock?” I demanded.

Potter craned to look at it. “Can’t be. Can’t be.”

Donato came in, his face scrubbed and shining. “Morning, Palmer. Potter.
Well, I wondered which one of us would fall first, and I guess I know
now, and who’d a’ thunk it.” He nodded aft and began coughing.

We looked. The monkey was stepping off one foot and onto the other in
front of England’s door.

“You ought to mind your own business, Don.”

“Oh, sure,” said Donato agreeably. “Guess you’re right at that.”

Just then, England flung his door open, saw Nils Blum crouching there,
and recoiled with an odd high squeak.

Immediately he growled, in his deepest bass, “Don’t hang around me,
monk,” and pushed past the utility man without a backward glance.

We watched, looking past him as he approached. Blum ducked his head
inside England’s door, withdrew it, took a step toward us and stopped,
his jaw working silently, his big wrinkled head held a little askew.

“But hungry, I’m hungry,” England said. “Whatever time is it?”

“Clock’s busted.” Potter suddenly laughed. We all looked at him. “Well,”
he said, pointing at England, “it’s not him, either.”

“You were just saying to Don, he ought to mind his own business,” I
snapped. I wonder, I thought to myself, if he knows I cut at him because
he twiddles his nose?

“What business? What goes?” England demanded.

“By holy creepin’ Kramden,” said Donato to himself. He looked aft at the
miserable figure there and forward at the closed door to the wardroom
and control. “What do you know.”

“He is a very surprising man,” I said.

“Who? Who? The skipper? What’s he done now?” England insisted.

“Virginia seems to be missing,” said Donato.

Hearing her name, Blum ran three steps toward us and then stopped in the
mess hall door, looking timidly at our faces, one by one.

“Well,” said England, “rank has its privileges.”

Potter blew sharply through his nostrils, expressing a great deal and
disposing of the matter. He glanced at the clock. “What’d you say is
wrong with it?”

“Nothing’s wrong with it.”

We turned abruptly and faced the captain. There was an oddness about
him, a set to his jaw, a certain hard something in his eye that hadn’t
been there at all before. Or maybe it had, there at the table this
morning. (Was that this morning? What the clock said just made no sense
at all.) I looked at the captain and past him, through his open door,
through the wardroom with his neat bunk at the side, on forward to the
control console and observation blister.

There wasn’t anybody up there.

From the other doorway, the utility monkey whispered, “Sir …

?”

“Something the matter with the lights, Captain,” Donato said.

“It’s all right,” said the captain shortly. He went to the mess hall
peeper and switched it on. He dialed for starboard view and stepped
back.

We crowded around it. Everything looked about the same out there, the
wide vein of jewels straggling across the sky, then the unrelieved
black.

“Show you something,” said the captain. He moved the controls and the
view zoomed in toward the stars. At close to peak magnification, he
switched to the fine tuning and got the cross-hairs where he wanted
them. “Know what that is?”

It was a ball, shiny, golden. It was impossible to say how big. Then I
heard England gasp.

“I’ve seen that before. Pictures. That’s the Barrier Control—the
planetoid!”

“So close?” I asked.

“Just because the Barrier is a sphere,” said the captain, “everyone
assumes the control has to be in the center. Well, it isn’t. It’s right
here at the edge, and heaven help anything that goes in there in a rush,
trying to converge on the center!”

“Sir …” came the whisper.

“Now look,” said the captain, winding the zoom handle again. The view
backed away from the golden sphere until it was almost lost. Suddenly
the screen filled with a flat-topped, streamlined—

“A pod, a ship’s pod!” said England.

The captain stepped back a pace and watched the pod with glowing eyes.
His hands were pressed tight together and some great suppressed
excitement yearned in him to burst free. We looked from him to the
peeper.

Under his breath, the captain said, “Git’m! Go git’m!”

“Sir …”

“Shut up, monk.”

“That pod’s inside the Barrier!” somebody said. Me, I think.

“Look! Look there!”

It was like a segment of ivory knitting needle. It was turning slowly
end over end. It approached the pod slowly, high, passed close by and
drifted out of the picture.

“A missile, a big one.”

“My God, what’s happened?” gasped Donato.

“The Barrier’s down,” said the captain, as if he couldn’t hold the words
inside any longer. “It’s down, you see? It’s gone and the missiles are
all dead.”

“Sir, oh, Cap’n … I can’t find Virginia. Where’s Virginia, Cap’n?”

“You’re looking at her, Blum. You’re looking right at her,” said the
captain, his eyes fixed on the screen.

Something hit us, scattered us. For a moment, the mess hall was a swirl
of grunts and outraged yells, and then the utility monkey had tumbled us
aside and was standing in front of the peeper, one hand on each side of
the frame. He seemed a half head taller, all at once, and his one hairy
arm, where it passed close by me, had cords on it I hadn’t known about
before; his head was a lion’s head.

Suddenly he barked, “What’d you do? What’d you do?” He was talking to
the captain, who kept looking over Blum’s shoulder at the picture and
was laughing softly. Then the monkey whirled from the screen, turning as
if to turn was to tear something, and he faced the captain and said
again, “What’d you do? What’d you do with Virginia?”

The captain stopped laughing altogether and was a captain duty-talking
to a utility monkey. “I gave her orders and I put her in that pod and
sent her on her way. Any objections, mister?”

Blum’s eyes began to protrude—honestly, you could see them press
outward. His mouth opened slowly, slowly, and a dribble suddenly scored
the corner of the mouth and down the side of the chin; the hands came
up, clawed, half-grasping. The nostrils trembled, trembled … and then he
screamed so loud, so close to us, it was a like a big dazzling light
flashing to blind us.

We reared back from that scream, pawing at it.

Next thing was Blum, crouched over and peering ahead as he ran, trying
to go somewhere, not knowing how. He ran crazily to the airlock hatch
and hit it with his fists, and turned with his back to it and screamed
again. “You send me, you hear? You send me with Virginia, you hear me,
Cap’n?”

Donato strolled over toward him and, smiling, said the stupidest thing I
ever heard squirted into a violent silence: “Aw, come on, monkey, let’s
all be chums.”

Blum screamed again and Donato didn’t wait to get turned around. He ran
straight backward until he hit me, and I caught him and held him up so
he didn’t fall.

“Captain, sir,” Donato said, squinching his head around as he dangled
from my hands, “he won’t mind me at all, Captain.”

“Get to your quarters, Blum,” said the captain from way back in his
throat.

“You bring her back or you send me out with her,” slavered Blum. “You
hear me?”

“Get—to—your—quarters.”

Blum put up his claws. He began walking toward the captain, chewing on
his own mouthparts, and his eyes were crazy. The captain bent a little
low and put his arms out a little from his sides, and moved very slowly
toward Blum. We all got back out of the way.

Blum said, “Now! You hear me?” very softly, and leaped.

The captain stepped aside and hit him. I thought it was on the head, but
England told me later it was on the side of the neck, toward the back.
The monkey was in midair when the captain hit him, and he went right
down on the deck on his face, and he didn’t put out his hands to stop
himself, and he didn’t move.

We all looked at him and then at each other.

“Take him to his quarters,” said the captain.

His voice startled me because it wasn’t where I thought it was, standing
by the sprawled-out monkey. He was already across the room staring into
the peeper. For him, the thing was finished; probably his heart wasn’t
quick any more. He was back with his work, his job. The rest of us had
poundings in the sides of our necks and we didn’t know what to do.

“Go on, go on. Get him out of here. You, Palmer. You’re the biggest.”

I was going to splutter, but I held on tight to it and didn’t. I said,
“See here, I don’t have to—”

From back in his throat, like before, the captain spoke to me. It was a
different thing, being the one he spoke to like that and not watching
somebody else get it.

He said, “_You_ see here—you do have to. Whatever I say, you have to,
not only you, Palmer, but all four of you clowns. The party’s over and
the work’s done, and from now on out, you mind me and think first of
what I want. At all times. Is that clear, mister?”

I said, loud, “Well, I—” and the skipper ripped his eyes away from the
screen, almost like Blum, tearing something, and looked at me. So I
picked up the monkey’s shoulders and dragged him back to his cabin.

It was just like ours, only he didn’t have quite so much stuff lying
around, or anyway what there was in square stacks.

I tumbled him into the bunk and closed the door, because that was the
only clear place to lean back against, and I leaned on it and tried to
get my breath back.

The monkey started to make a scratchy sound in the rear of his throat. I
looked down at him. His head was twisted to one side. It was jammed
against the pillow. His eyes were open.

“Cut that out, monk.” He went right on doing it. “That noise, cut it
out, hear me? I said, you hear me, mister?”

That “mister” didn’t sound a bit like the skipper’s. I was embarrassed.

The monkey’s eyes stayed open and I realized he wasn’t blinking them; he
wasn’t seeing out of them. I couldn’t stand that breathing noise, so
finally I straightened out his head and put the pillow under it. He
stopped the noise right away. He closed his eyes.

I still couldn’t get my breath. He had blood on his face; maybe that was
it.

He didn’t open his eyes, but he began to talk, very fast, very soft. It
was like being too far away from someone to understand what was being
said, and then it was like coming closer …

“… all she had to do was let herself and she couldn’t do it, she
couldn’t just stop fighting and believe. It was like she’d die if she
believed anything. She wanted to. More than anything she wanted to. But
it was like someone told her, if you believe in anything, you’ll die.”

He opened his eyes suddenly and saw me and closed them again.

“Palmer. You Palmer you, you saw it your own self, the time she cried.
All that time, all those weeks, those gray eyes still and hiding
whatever it was she had inside her, and me begging her and begging:
‘Virginia, oh, Virginia, I don’t care what you think of me. I wouldn’t
want you to love me, Virginia. But only believe me; you can so be loved,
you’re worth loving, I love you. I do, Virginia; just you believe that
once, because it’s true, and after that you’ll be able to believe other
things … little ones at first; I’ll help you with them, and always tell
you the truth.’ ”

“I said, ‘Don’t love me, Virginia, or think about it at all. I wouldn’t
know what to do with it if you gave me anything like that.’ I said,
‘Just trust me is all I want, so you can ask me what’s the truth and
I’ll tell you. But believe I love you; I’m not much, Virginia, so I
guess that’s not too much to start on. Believe I love you, Virginia,
will you just do that?’ And she …”

He lay with his eyes open for a long time and I thought he was
unconscious again, but then he blinked his eyes and went on.

“… She cried, all at once, all over, and she said, ‘Monkey, monkey,
you’re tearing me up, can’t you see? I want to believe you. I want to
believe you more than anything in the world. But I can’t, I don’t know
how, I’m not supposed to, I’m not allowed.’ That’s what she said. And
she cried again and said, ‘But I want to believe you, monkey. You just
don’t know how much I want to believe that. Only … nothing is what it
looks like, nothing is what it’s supposed to be, no one really wants
what they say they want. I can’t believe them and I can’t believe
you.’ ”

“She said, ‘Suppose I believed you and then the day came when things
were all straight and true, and they let you see everything; and suppose
I found out then that everything you said wasn’t so; found out maybe
there was no you at all, monkey … what about that? I couldn’t stand
that. I don’t dare believe you, because I want to. If I don’t believe
anything about anything or anyone, then if things get all true, I can
start there and be all right without losing anything.’ And she cried
some more and then, you, Palmer, you came in, and in a second she was
back inside her flat gray eyes. So she didn’t believe me and that’s
why.”

I couldn’t get my breath. Blum couldn’t get his breath. I leaned on the
door and he lay on the bed and we panted.

“There was a difference,” he whispered, chasing some thought he was
having. “She had a way of making you doubt anything you said. I told her
my mother could cook. She said, ‘Your mother could cook’ in that flat
way, and you know, I had to think and wonder if my mother really could.
That’s what I mean. But I said to her, ‘Virginia, you know, I love you,’
and she said, ‘You love me’ in that same way, like who ever heard of
such a thing?”

“But what I’m trying to say, that didn’t touch me, when she did that
when I said I love you. I looked into how I felt and I felt the same no
matter what she said. So about that, there was a difference. That’s how
it was all right to say, ‘Believe me, believe me about that.’ I knew
that things could change. I knew that almost anything I told her could
be wrong, some way. But not that. She could trust me with that. And she
wanted to. At least I got that.”

I leaned against the door, feeling embarrassed, and then I could turn it
to anger.

I said, “You’re stupid, monkey, you know? You’re crew, she’s CG. She
couldn’t stop you. Why didn’t you just go right ahead? That’s what she’s
aboard for.”

But that didn’t make him angry. He looked up at the ceiling and said
quietly, “Yeah, she said that, too. She said, ‘You don’t know what you
want, monkey,’ she said. She said, ‘This is what you want. So go ahead,
only stop talking about it.’ I said no. I said there could be a time—I
hadn’t thought about it yet; I wanted something else first—I wanted her
to believe me. She said I was crazy and to keep away from her then, but
after, you saw it, Palmer. After, she said she wanted to believe me,
more than anything.”

He was quiet at last, breathing easily, thinking about something to
smile at. I spoke to him, but he didn’t answer. He was asleep, I guess.
I opened the door quietly and closed it on him and went back to the mess
hall.

They were all there by the peeper, watching.

I said, “He’s asleep now, but there’s going to be particular hell to pay
when he wakes up and really understands she isn’t here.”

The skipper looked away from the screen at me and then back again. He
wouldn’t spit on the mess hall deck, but he might as well, the way his
face looked. He couldn’t worry about that monkey.

I asked Potter, “What goes?”

Potter said, “Whether to get mad or glad, I don’t know. You specialist,
Palmer—you’re a clown. And England. Donato. Me, too. Virginia, she was
the specialist all along. She was the one this whole thing is for. How
much farther?” he called out.

“A few meters,” said Donato, absorbed.

I looked at the peeper. The ship’s pod, that long false underbelly we’d
hauled all the way from the Earth Worlds, it was drifting in close to
that golden ball. That ball, I could see it now, it was big as a
supership if you could roll a supership into a ball. It was big as some
moons. There were pale sticks drifting all over, dozens of them.

“Dead missiles, you see?” said Potter, watching the screen. “All dead.
Every single cold-fusion power plant and explosive in a thousand
kilometers is dead. Maybe more. Ours, too.”

“Ours?”

“That hum, that flicker. We’re not tapping a cold-fusion plant now,
Palmer. We’re taking off a steam turbine, water superheated by a
parabolic mirror from that sun yonder.”

“Steam turbine take us home?”

“Stupid!”

Donato chimed in. It was weird. Everybody talking whispery, as if loud
noises would spoil something in the peeper. Nobody looked at anybody to
talk, just kept watching the peeper, some of them moving the mouth all
to one side to talk to one, to the other side to talk to someone else.

Donato said, “Little turbine wouldn’t move this can half a length.”

“It’s all right,” England said. “What she’s doing, she’s going in there
to leech on to that planetoid. First there’s a catalyst that will
crumble a pit in the armor, because a bomb’ll hardly scratch it. Them
when the skin’s thin enough, she’s got a bomb there. It goes off and no
more Barrier.”

“He said the Barrier’s gone.”

“Sure. She damped it. She’s holding it dead. If she let go, bango, back
comes the Barrier and all those missiles come to life.”

“What’s this damped, holding it dead, letting go—what is all this?” I
was getting impatient.

The skipper saw fit to say something. “We call it the D-field because—”
he was quiet a long time—“because that way it sounds like something we
know about, can know about.”

He flicked a quick glance at all of us, as if somebody was going to
laugh. Nobody was going to laugh.

“What it is,” said the skipper, hating to say it, “it’s doubt. A field
of doubt. I mean—well, doubt, that’s all.”

Nobody said anything. Doubt, all right. But doubt has a way of getting
invisible after a captain makes all those loud captain noises like he
did.

I imagine he knew that. None of it was our business, not any more, but
he didn’t want to be doubted, not even by us specialists—us clowns.

He said, “What we did, we found Virginia trying to commit suicide. She
had this doubt thing on her back, naturally. She didn’t want to go on,
because she had nothing she could believe in. Or just plain believe.
Well, we took her and gave her some treatments … I’m a skipper, I don’t
know the details … Anyway, she came out of it with what she had when she
went in, but more so. Much more. You all felt it—don’t tell me you
didn’t. She could make a man doubt his own name.”

I said, “Yeah …” only realizing when I heard it that I’d said it aloud.

Captain Steev watched the screen for a while and said under his breath,
“That’s right … atta girl …” and then to us, “It was a tricky problem.
Given that a concentrated disbelief in things could have an effect like
this—just for the sake of argument—if you want someone to stop a big
power plant from a great distance with this faculty, how do you
transport that someone in a ship powered with the same type of plant?”

“If it was a machine now,” said England, “I’d say assemble it only when
you wanted to use it.”

“That’s what they did with the first fission bombs,” said Donato
knowledgeably. “They didn’t put it together until it was due to blow.
They blew it _by_ putting it together. But doing that with a person,
now …”

“You have the idea. You can’t disbelieve in anything until you know what
it is, or at least what people think it is. I can’t believe or
disbelieve that _pyoop_ is a word for godmother in High Martian. I just
don’t know. Well, Virginia didn’t know one way or another about a
cold-fusion plant, though I swear ours gasped a time or two on the way
out. She has a large amount of control over it.”

England said with sudden impatience, “Excuse me, Captain, but the only
reason I can stand here talking about this is I see it working.”

“Let me tell you, then. The cold-fusion plant is a Luanae idea. It’s
real simple-minded. Anybody can understand it once it’s explained to
them. Everything was set up when we came out here, including you four.
The crackpot experts who knew more than people who’ve been in this all
their lives. But as far as she was concerned, you were experts right up
to the time I set you up and knocked you down—factorial sigma and the
square-centimeter magnetic field, hah!

“She doubted you were experts when she first saw you, just because she
doubted everything. When she saw what I did to you, she felt she was
right to doubt. She reached a … sort of peak of disbelief. My God,
didn’t you feel it?… Look there, she’s leeched down. Now the catalyst
will be working on the armor. It won’t be long now.”

“I still don’t see how just plain disbelief can shut down power plants,”
I argued.

“Not power plants. Just cold-fusion plants. Well, let me tell you and
you’ll understand. I put a shot of sleep-gas in your ventilators and got
you all out of the way. Then—”

“Snowdrops,” I said, remembering.

“Then I put her in the pod and told her to ride it, that’s all. Except
I … armed her … like you arm a bomb, you see? I told her what a
cold-fusion plant is. She didn’t care one way or the other, mind, but
she listened while I explained it to her, all the parts. Then I gave her
a paper and told her this is exactly what happens. I told her to read it
as soon as the red light on the panel went on, which would be when she
was clear of the ship.”

“Read what?” somebody asked, after it got too quiet.

It was a long wait, watching that pod leeched to the planetoid and
nothing happening but white sticks drifting, rocks, bits of stuff the
planetoid had pulled in and hadn’t been able to eat …

“Read what?” the captain finally repeated. “The cold-fusion formula,
that’s all. Written out in words of one cylinder. When Hydrogen One and
Hydrogen Two are in the presence of mu mesons, they fuse into Helium
Three with an energy yield in electron volts of 5.4 times ten to the
fifth power. That’s what was on the paper. She knew, piece by each, what
the parts were—what mu mesons and Helium Three are and what is meant by
that many electron volts. She had all that buried deep in her before we
left the Earth Worlds. She’d had no occasion to put them together,
that’s all.

“And here I come saying (on paper), ‘This gadget does exactly such and
such.’ Well, she just out and out doesn’t believe it. That would make no
never mind to a turbine or a power drill, but when you get into
subatomic particles, clouds of them, involved in a catalysis—untouched
in the long run, but I imagine pretty edgy … and you slam them with this
thing, whatever it is she has …”

Suddenly impatient, he rapped, “Who am I trying to convince? It works,
you see?”

I said, “Get off my foot, monk,” and went on watching the screen. I
don’t think anyone else noticed the utility man. I hardly did myself.

“Hey,” Donato said suddenly, “our generators are out, right? How do we
get out of here?”

“When the bomb blows—no more D-field. Simple.”

England barked, just as suddenly, “And what about all those missiles
with the damper gone? They shoot off in every—”

“Dry up, clown,” said the skipper. “And keep your panic to yourself.
Every one of those missiles is triggered from one place and one place
only—that planetoid. How do you think they were kept inside the Barrier
and off the Luanae Earths all this time? Who cares if they get their
power and explosives again? There’ll be nobody in the driver’s seat any
more. Now shut up. It ought to blow pretty quick.”

“Blow how? If it’s right in the middle of the—uh—damping field—”

“I said shut up! That isn’t a cold-fusion bomb. It’s a hairy old
thermonuclear that doesn’t give a damn what anybody believes.”

“What is it? What’s going to _happen? What’s_ out there? Where—”

“Go on back to bed, monk,” I said out of the side of my mouth, watching
the screen. I meant it to sound kind—he’d had a bad time—but it didn’t
come out kind. I guess I’ll never get used to talking to them.

It let go.

Oh, my God.

Captain Steev was wrong. There was triggering, somewhere, in some part
of that split-second of hell. Because all the missiles went, too. They
didn’t fly; they didn’t hunt. The warheads went.

It took a long time for our eyes to come back. The peeper screen was
gone for good.

The turbine moaned down and down the scale and stopped. The lights
stopped that annoying side-of-the-eye flicker.

“We got to go and get Virginia,” was the first complete sentence anyone
said.

Somebody laughed. Not a funny laugh.

England’s voice was harsh. “Don’t be stupider ‘n you have to be, monkey.
Don’t you see we’re back on our cold-fusion plant?”

“That makes no difference to him,” I told England. “He wasn’t around
when the skipper explained.”

“Who wasn’t around?” barked the captain. “Damn it, Blum, nobody told you
to leave your quarters. You’re confined, you understand that? You,
Palmer, can’t I trust you to—”

“Wait!” The scream was almost more than a man could take. It was almost
like that flare of light.

The monkey stood there in the middle of the mess hall, going mad again.
“Wait, wait, _wait!_ I got to know. You all know. I don’t. What
_happened?_”

“Come on, Blum,” I said quickly. I was afraid of him, but I think I was
more afraid of the captain. He had a look on his face I never want to
see any more.

He brought the face close to Blum and said, “You want to know, well,
okay, and I don’t see why I should waste time or pity on a goddam
monkey. That bomb knocked off the planetoid and the Barrier, which is
what we came here for, and it knocked off your Virginia because that’s
what she was sent out for. Okay?”

“What you want to kill her for?” Blum whispered.

“You wouldn’t happen to know any other way to bring back our power
plant, now would you?” snarled the captain.

I tried to explain to the utility monkey. “She didn’t believe the plant
could work, Blum. So it couldn’t work.”

“I could make her believe. I could. I could.”

We looked at him, the big tilted head, the trembling nostrils. He wasn’t
going to get crazy mad, after all. He was going into something else. It
scared me more than his going crazy mad would.

He said, “It was you, wasn’t it, fixed it so she wouldn’t believe
anything?”

“She had a head start,” said the skipper, and turned his back. “Come on,
Potter. Donato. You’re crew now, like it or not. Let’s get this can the
hell home. We got news for the people.”

“I never thought human beings could be like that,” Blum said very
quietly. “I never believed they could.”

“Get to bed, monk,” I said. And before I could stop myself, I begged
him. “Please. Please, Blum—get out of his way.”

He looked up into my face for a long time. Suddenly he said, “All right,
Palmer.” Then he just left.

I felt a lot better. Does you good to know you can handle people.

“Bunk in, men. We jump in five minutes.” The captain went forward to
check his controls.

“Well, don’t stand there!” I barked at them. “Bunk in, men!”

“You know what, Palmer, you’re a jerk,” Donato told me. Then we all
bunked down.

Four minutes went by. Five. I heard the whir of machinery.

The lights went out. The whir was a moan, then a whine. The lights came
on dim, then bright, and flickering at the edges of the eyes.

I didn’t figure it was any of my business, so I just lay there and
waited. Pretty soon the captain came back. He leaned against my cabin
door and looked at me.

“Something the matter?” I wanted to know, trying to sound intelligent.

“Power plant’s out, is all.”

“Oh,” I said. “Uh—what’s wrong with it?”

He heaved a slow sigh. “Nothing. Only it doesn’t work.”

“I guess I better get up,” I said.

“Why?” he asked me, and went away.

I got up anyway and went and told Donato and Potter and England. They
stayed where they were. They didn’t like this quiet skipper with the
quiet voice and no arguments.

“You know, if he can’t fix it, we don’t go anywhere. The Luanae have no
ships and we can’t reach any of their planets,” England told me. I’d as
soon he hadn’t.

I went to see Blum, for something to do.

He had his eyes open without seeing anything and he was mumbling to
himself. I tried to hear.

“… A little kid, they say you have the same chance as everybody else,
you believe them. ‘I’ll hold your bag,’ they say, ‘while you get the
tickets. Don’t worry, I’ll be here when you get back,’ and you believe
them … ‘Got a great job for you, son. Light work, big tips—’ ”

“Monkey,” I said.

He looked up at me. “You know what, Palmer? She said if you don’t
believe anything at all, you lose nothing when it all comes straight at
last. It’s all come straight for me now, Virginia. I can be safe now,
Virginia, not believing. They can’t take anything away from you that
way. You’re so right.”

He went on talking like that for a long time. I left and walked forward
and found the captain. He was in the control room jiggling a handle back
and forth and not looking at it.

I said, “Captain, that D-field the girl had—now could a person fall into
that by himself—I mean without those Earth World doctors and all?”

“You sure you have to come bother me about it?” he asked in a whisper,
not looking at me.

I backed way off and said, “I think I do. I think the monkey’s got a
case of the same.”

“Now that’s crazy! He’d have to have a real shock to get into a state
like that. The monkey’s okay. Beat it.”

“He’s mumbling how he doesn’t believe in anything.”

So the captain went aft with me. He watched the utility monkey for a
time and then said, “Well, we’ll fix it so he doesn’t believe one way or
another,” and hit the man in the bed on the jaw so he slid up and banged
his head on the inboard bulkhead.

I could hear the monkey breathing and I could hear the steam turbine, on
and on.

I said, “I guess being unconscious doesn’t make any difference to what
you believe.”

“You should know,” said the captain. “All right, Palmer, pick him up and
bring him along.”

“Where?”

“Shut up.”

He walked out. I guessed I’d better go along with him. I heaved and
grunted the monkey up over my shoulder. I almost fell down with him. The
captain was waiting in the corridor. He started to walk when I came out,
so I followed him. We went down to pod level and forward to the airlock.
Captain Steev began to undo the inner lock.

“What you going to do?” I asked him.

“Shut up,” said the captain.

“You fixing to kill this monkey?”

“You want to get home?”

“I don’t know,” I said, and thought about it.

The captain flung back the inner door and stood up. He said, “What’s
your trouble, Palmer?”

I said, “I don’t think I’m going to let you do this, Captain. There’s
some other way. You don’t have to kill a little utility man.”

“Put him in, Palmer.”

I stood there with the limp monkey on my shoulder and glared at the
captain while he glared back. I don’t know how that might have ended—I
do, only I’m ashamed to say it—but there was a noise and a voice, and
somebody stood up out of the lock.

“Well, it’s about time,” Virginia complained. “You had the inner lock
dogged and I’ve been lying in there for an hour. I guess I went to
sleep. Who’s that? What’s the matter with Nils?”

The captain looked like a man with a cup of flour in the face. _“Who
told you to leave the pod?”_

“The Luanae,” she said calmly. “Inside my head, like. It was funny. Told
me how to get into the flight-suit and how to get the gas bottles and
strap them all together and use them to jet clear of the pod and that
big gold thing. I got a long way away and then they told me to get back
of a big piece of rock floating there. There was a lot of light. They
told me when to go again, after the pieces stopped flying by. It was
easier then. There’s a jet unit built right into the suit, did you know
that? The Luanae told me how I was supposed to use it.”

I got my jaw working and said, “What made you think you could make it
go?”

“Well, it’s the same kind of unit that brought us here, isn’t it? You
can’t help believing your own eyes.”

At last the captain moved. Before he could say a word, I slung the
monkey down to the deck and pushed him. I bet the captain has been hit
in his life, and maybe kicked, but I don’t believe anyone just up and
pushed him in the chest. He sat right down like a child with his legs
spraddled out, looking up at me.

“Now you just stay there and shut up yourself,” I told him. “You’re
always doing everything with these people the wrong way.”

Virginia was kneeling beside the monkey. “What is it? What happened to
him?”

I said, “He got a bump, that’s all. Listen, if you don’t mind me asking,
do you believe he loves you?”

“Oh, yes!” she said immediately.

“Then I tell you what. You stay right here with him and rock him back
and forth a little till his eyes open, hear? Then tell him that—tell him
you believe him. That’s all.”

The captain scrambled to his feet and opened his mouth to bellow. I
bellowed first. I don’t know where it came from, but I believed I could
do it, and it was a time to believe things.

“You! You get up forward and check your controls. This can’s going to
take off like a scalded eel if you’ve left the controls open, and I
don’t want these folks shaken up. Go on, quick! You’re the only one here
who knows how to do that. I’m the only one who knows how to do this
other. Right? Right!” I said and pushed him.

He growled at me, but he went right up the ladder.

I hunkered down beside those two people and looked them over. I felt
fine, very fine.

I said, “Virginia, you know what this is? This is the day everything all
comes out straight. Right? Right.”

“You’re a funny sort of man, Mr. Palmer.”

“A clown, ma’am.”

I made a face at her and went up the ladder. About the time I reached
the top, the ship began to move. I fell right back down again, but they
didn’t think it was funny. They didn’t even seem to see me.

I climbed up quietly and went back to my cabin.



STORY NOTES


by Paul Williams

“WON’T YOU WALK …?”: first published in _Astounding Science Fiction_,
January 1956. Written autumn 1955.

Sturgeon wrote what he liked to call a “rubric” (an explanatory or
introductory commentary) introducing this story in an anthology called
Writers’ Choice put together by _Analog_ magazine in 1984. He wrote:

_An odd thing has happened to me throughout my writing life: a hint, or
an impulse, or some such which sidles into what I am writing, ignoring
my lack of any formal training, or indeed, any real information. Next
thing I know—or years later—this “something” will show up in the
marketplace, or in a new mental therapy, or in the form (as happened
recently) of a long quotation in the_ Proceedings of the Institute of
Electrical and Electronic Engineers _from one of my yarns, describing a
futuristic device which is suddenly on the cutting edge of a modern
technology. And sometimes a notion like that hasn’t been used yet, but
will be because it must be. A perfect example is buried in this story:
it’s the therapeutic use of the glaring, flashing red light in the
correction of certain negative self-evaluations. I know of no therapist
who uses it in all the years since it appeared (in 1956) but I know
someone will. There are, by the way, much better ways of doing this than
by punching little holes in an audio tape; these had not been devised
when I wrote the story. You’ll understand all this when you read it_.

_A word must be said about the title. Many readers have told me that if
they think of it at all, they are satisfied that it has to do with
learning to crawl before learning to walk. It has nothing to do with
that. I chose it because it is the opening line of a poem, or song, or
bit of doggerel, which I seem to have known since I was a child, and
therefore concluded that everyone must know it. As far as I have been
able to find since, however, nobody has ever heard of this source, and
if anyone can identify it for me, I’ll be pleased. The line is:_

_“ ‘Won’t you walk into my parlor?’ said the spider to the fly …”_

Attached to the carbon of this rubric found amongst Sturgeon’s papers
are two letters from readers responding to the above request and
identifying the poem the story’s title is taken from as “The Spider and
the Fly” by Mary Howitt, which actually begins, “Will you walk …”

Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine appearance:
SITUATIONS CAN PILE UP ON A MAN SO THEY DRIVE HIM TO DESPERATE ACTION.
USUALLY, THOUGH, THE DESPERATE ACTION IS ALONG THE WRONG LINE; PROPERLY
APPLIED, IT WOULD SOLVE THE PROBLEM …

_“NEW YORK VIGNETTE”:_ _first published (posthumously) in The Magazine
of Fantasy & Science Fiction, October/November 1999_. _Written sometime
in 1955 as a script for the “Pulse” program on the NBC radio station in
New York City, The manuscript of the story/script was found among
Sturgeon’s papers after his death, and was submitted to F&SF in 1999 by
the Sturgeon Literary Trust when the editor of F&SF asked for an
unpublished Sturgeon story for use in the annual anniversary issue. The
story was evidently submitted to the same magazine in the form of a
recording in early 1956. In a letter to F&SF editor Anthony Boucher
dated Feb 4, 1956, TS wrote: _You shall ere long receive … one flat grey
package containing a phono record (NOTE: It plays 33/1/3 rpm but with a
78 needle) and its script. The reading is by John Wingate, and no one
could have done a more sensitive job. The music was chosen by Draper
Lewis, who was producer of this particular show. PULSE was a 13-week
experiment by NBC, a local offering featuring remotes all over town, a
roving mike, and various features presenting a new freedom from the
rigid 30 or 15-minute shackles of radio; if a feature took 17 minutes
they wouldn’t cut it; if an interview tok an interesting turn, they let
it run. PULSE is now an early-morning show of somewhat more conventional
nature; the experiment (which ran on Saurdays from 7_ _A.M._ _to 2_
_P.M._) _was not exactly a failure; the gigantic network MONITOR is very
largely the postcursor of the original PULSE. If you want this [story]
on paper in the event of acceptance for F&SF, it can be easily
arranged_._

“THE HALF-WAY TREE MURDER”: first published in _The Saint Detective
Magazine_, March 1956. Editor’s blurb from the first page of the
original magazine appearance: IN THE BRIGHT JAMAICAN SUNLIGHT IT WAS
HARD FOR COTRELL TO BELIEVE THAT MURDER COULD WEAR SO CRUELLY
TREACHEROUS A MASK. Editor’s introduction to this story from the
original magazine appearance: “It isn’t often that a writer with a
top-echelon reputation in one branch of imaginative fiction reaches a
shining pinnacle of mastery in another. But Theodore Sturgeon is the
exception which disproves the rule. True, a good many science fiction
writers besides Mr. Sturgeon have an enviable record of accomplishment
in the mystery field. But a yarn such as this, a perfect gem of a
mystery which will linger long in memory, is rather special, we think.”

As the readers of this series of books know, Sturgeon knew Jamaica well,
having lived there in 1941 and ’42.

“THE SKILLS OF XANADU”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_,
July 1956. Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine
appearance: WHEN A MALIGNANT WORLD ENDANGERS ANOTHER, SURGERY IS THE
USUAL ANSWER. BUT PERHAPS THERE IS ANOTHER—KILL IT WITH KINDNESS!

Sturgeon’s introduction to this story in his 1979 collection _The Golden
Helix:_

_Wishful thinking … I yearn to live on Xanadu, and wear their garment,
and join with them in their marvelous lifestyle_.

_Well, I can’t live there and I can’t live as they do, but I can do the
next best thing: to infect locked-up minds with the idea of freedom in
highly contagious ways_.

__Dr. Toni Morrison, novelist, essayist and educator, gave a
commencement address at Bard College in 1979 in which she said (among
many other powerful things) that your freedom is worthless unless you
use it to free someone else, and that happiness is not happiness unless
it makes others happy_._

_I never set down in a simple declarative sentence the theme of my
Xanadu story, and now a truly great human being has done it for me_.

A radio dramatization of this story aired on WBAI-FM in New York City
sometime in he 1960s.

The title of the story, and the name of the planet and community where
it takes place, are clearly taken from Coleridge’s poem “Kubla Khan,”
which is so well known in the English-speaking world that _Webster’s New
Collegiate Dictionary_ defines “Xanadu” as “a place (as a town or
village) of idyllic beauty.” This story and its companion piece “The
Touch of your Hand” (1953), which presents the same very powerful and
original-to-Sturgeon idea and ideal, are clearly conscious efforts at
utopian writing by Sturgeon (as he confirms in the story-introduction
quoted above).

“When I was a child,” science fiction novelist Somtow Sucharitkul wrote
in _Locus_ in July 1985, “I wanted to be exactly like Theodore Sturgeon
when I grew up. This was because I discovered a short story called ‘The
Skills of Xanadu’ in an anthology in a carton of abandoned books on the
floor of the library at the Bangkok British School. It was a story set
in a universe of astonishing beauty and brutality, a universe ultimately
redeemed by compassion. This story changed my life. Later I parlayed the
story’s theme into an entire tetralogy of my own, but you see, Ted said
it all in only twenty pages.”

“THE CLAUSTROPHILE”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_, August
1956. Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine
appearance: EVERY ONCE IN A WHILE, ALONG COMES A STORY LIKE THIS THAT
TURNS ‘COMMON SENSE’ AROUND—AND PLUMPS IT DOWN SQUARELY ON ITS FEET!

Sturgeon’s introduction to this story in his 1979 collection _The Stars
Are the Styx:_

_We are a hero-hungry culture, and it has been a convention to visualize
our heroes—especially in the early days of science fiction—to give our
heroes bulging deltoids, perfect teeth, and a short temper. The
transference of this hero to the controls of spacecraft is
understandable but hardly rational. Why a man who is best qualified for
bare-handed conflict with a Siberian tiger is the ideal spaceman defies
logic_.

_“Show me a man who cannot be by himself,” said my dear old mother, “and
I’ll show you a man who is not good company.” It was this cogitation
that led me to wonder why, in so much science fiction, the spaceman had
to be the intellectual heir of Conan the Conqueror_.

_Or, for that matter, why had he to be a man at all? Despite the proven
preferences of NASA, women really are as smart as human beings, and by
and large, are smaller and lighter_.

_This is the line of thought that produced “The Claustrophile.”_

“DEAD DAMES DON’T DIAL”: first published in _The Saint Detective
Magazine_, August 1956. This story was adapted as a television drama and
broadcast on a program called Schlitz Playhouse in 1959.

Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine appearance:

ARRESTING A KILLER FOR A MINOR BREACH OF THE LAW MAY BACKFIRE
DISASTROUSLY. BUT WITH LIEUTENANT HOWELL IT WAS A PATHWAY TO GLORY.

“FEAR IS A BUSINESS”: first published in _The Magazine of Fantasy and
Science Fiction_, August 1956. Editor’s introduction to this story from
the original magazine appearance: “Earlier in this issue, I quoted
Heinlein’s prophecy of the ‘mass psychoses’ of ‘the sixth decade’ of
this century, and referred to the ‘saucer’ hysteria as an example.
Much—far too much—science fiction has been writen about saucers, and far
too little about saucerism, its causes and implications. Here the
compassionate eye of Theodore Sturgeon contemplates a successful
saucermonger and finds—well, as in all of the best Sturgeon stories, a
little of the truth about all of us.”

“THE OTHER MAN”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_, September
1956. Written sometime in 1955 or early in 1956. This is one of two
stories in this volume that can be considered a collaboration between
two of the acknowledged grand masters of science fiction writing,
Theodore Sturgeon and Robert A. Heinlein.

_I went into a terrible dry spell one time, Sturgeon said in his Guest
of Honor speech at the 20th World Science Fiction Convention in Chicago
in 1962. It was a desperate dry spell and an awful lot depended on me
getting writing again. Finally, I wrote to Bob Heinlein. I told him my
troubles; that I couldn’t write—perhaps it was that I had no ideas in my
head that would strike a story. By return airmail—I don’t know how he
did it—I got back twenty-six story ideas. Some of them ran for a page
and a half; one or two of them were a line or two. I mean, there were
story ideas that some writers would give their left ear for, Gauguin and
Van Gogh. Some of them were merely suggestions; just little hints,
things that will spark a writer like, “Ghost of a little cat patting
around eternity looking for a familiar lap to sit in.”_

_This mechanical, chrome-plated Heinlein has a great deal of heart. I
had told him my writing troubles, but I hadn’t told him of any other
troubles, but clipped to the stack of story ideas was a check for a
hundred dollars with a little scribbled note, “I have a suspicion your
credit is bent.”_

_It is very difficult for words like “thank you” to handle a man that
can do a thing like that_.

_I have used, incidentally, two of his ideas since, with due credit
built in. Heinlein has some pen names, you know … and when I use one of
his ideas I use the names throughout the manuscript in some way. One of
the stories, “Fear Is a Business,” has pure Heinlein as the basic idea.
I think the other one was “The Other Man.” I am not sure about that, but
I do know “Fear Is a Business” was one of them_.

The latter statement is incorrect; Sturgeon while preparing his talk
seems to have confused “Fear Is a Business” with another story of his
that he sold to the same magazine the same year, “And Now the News …”,
which does indeed have “pure Heinlein” (from Robert Heinlein’s Feb. 11,
1955 letter to Sturgeon full of what he refers to as “Sturgeonish
ideas”) as its basic idea and indeed the source of its plot in detail.
“Fear Is a Business,” however, does not seem to derive from any of the
story ideas or suggestions in Heinlein’s letter, which I found among
Sturgeon’s papers after his death.

“The Other Man” definitely uses one of Heinlein’s letter’s ideas as a
springboard, and Sturgeon acknowledged this by naming Richard Newell’s
alternate personality in the story “Anson” (Robert A. Heinlein’s middle
name and the first part of Heinlein’s 1941 pseudonym Anson MacDonald).
On the second page of his typewritten, single-spaced, five-page letter,
Heinlein wrote:

“We know very little about multiple personality, despite the many case
records. Suppose a hypnoanalyst makes a deep investigation into a
schizoid … and comes up with the fact that it _is_ a separate and
non-crazy personality in the body, distinct from the nominal one, and
that this new personality is a refugee from (say) 2100 A.D., when
conditions are so intolerable that escape into another body and another
time (even this period) is to be preferred, even at the expense of
living more or less helplessly in another man’s body.”

The next paragraph of Heinlein’s letter follows this train of thought to
provide the basis for what would be one of Sturgeon’s finer stories,
“The Other Man”:

“Or do it this way: hypnoanalyst hypnotizes patient; second personality
emerges and refuses to go away. Original-owner personality is a nogood,
a bastard, a public enemy, a wifebeater, etc.; new personality is a real
hero-type, good, smart, hardworking, etc. What is the ethical situation?
Should the analyst try his damnedest to suppress and wipe out the false
personality and give the body back to its owner? Or should he accept
that the world is improved by the change? This could be made quite
critical.”

_In his introduction to “The Other Man” in the 1979 collection The Stars
Are the Styx, Sturgeon wrote: A great many scientists and technologists
are involved in science fiction. During the Big War, the largest block
of subscriptions to Astounding Science Fiction was in Oak Ridge,
Tennessee, and the next largest in Hanford, Washington—facts, John
Campbell told me, that the German military intelligence never discovered
or noticed. Whenever I appear on radio or television, the interviewer
may or may not know anything about the field, but you can bet the guys
behind the glass wall do. Many famous scientists, like astronomer Fred
Hoyle, anthropologist Chad Oliver, rocket designer G. Harry Stine, and
the late Willy Ley, have written it, and some, like Carl Sagan and
M.I.T.’s brilliant Marvin Minsky, have come to science through an early
love for it. And I had the heady experience of being told by a Nobel
caliber scientist that he became a microbiologist because of a single
story I wrote_.

_Such being the case, why doesn’t some psychiatrist or psychotherapist
pick up on the technique suggested by this story? Intuitively I know
that it, or something like it, just has to work. Intuition, of course,
is no substitute for expertise. In other words, if I knew enough I’d be
doing it instead of writing about it. But it’s a valid notion just the
same_.

Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine appearance:
IT WAS WHOLLY, SHOCKINGLY IMPOSSIBLE FOR HIM TO TAKE THIS CASE—ONE
REASON EVERYBODY KNEW; THE OTHER HE KEPT TO HIMSELF—ONLY THERE WAS NOT
ONE SINGLE WAY FOR HIM TO GET OUT OF IT!

_Sturgeon, after submitting “And Now the News …” to F&SF, told F&SF
editor Anthony Boucher the story of his collaboration with Heinlein, in
a letter dated May 21, 1956: I forgot to tell you one most important
thing about ANTN: a year ago last Feb I was in the blackest reaches of
Avichi and wrote a desperate yell to Bob Heinlein, saying I could write
but had nothing to say; by airmail special I got a thick missive
containing 26 valid story ideas, ranging from a single line (“… the
shade of a little cat padding through eternity looking for that one
familiar lap”) to 2_-_300 wd explications of epic ideas. Thru getting
this I made the discovery that I still couldn’t write, which made things
worse for me instead of better, but it was a most valuable thing to know
and saved me a lot of searching in wrong directions. Then came the
beginning of the upturn; the first of these RH ideas was what you just
bought. The next was THE OTHER MAN, upcoming later this year in GALAXY,
and so far that’s all. But there will be more of them, and my current
ambition is to keep them out of all other collections and run them as a
book dedicated to Bob. Hey, how about RH POSITIVE as a title?!_

Three-fourths of the way through this story, Sturgeon mentions the
inscription above the door of doctor Fred’s clinic—“Only man can fathom
man”—and says, “It was from Robert Lindner.” Possibly the quote is from
Lindner’s 1954 best-seller _The Fifty-Minute Hour: A Collection of True
Psychoanalytic Tales_.

“THE WAITING THING INSIDE” by Theodore Sturgeon and Don Ward; first
published in _Ellery Queen’s Mystery Magazine_, September 1956.

_In his Feb. 4, 1956 letter to Anthony Boucher, TS wrote: In addition I
have found (and I don’t know what would have happened to me if I hadn’t)
a collaborator—Don Ward, a really wonderful guy, a good editor, and
above all a patient man. Don dreams ’em up and I write ’em my way and
submit them without his seeing them; that last seems to be the thing
which makes it possible at all. We sold a Western that got a Special
Mention in the EQMM contest, another that has the lead in Howard
Browne’s new magazine, and have on the pan another EQMM murder mystery
and a Western aimed at the SEP [Saturday Evening Post]. This suggests
that both “The Waiting Thing Inside” and “The Deadly Innocent” were
written, and sold to the magazines they eventually appeared in, before
February 1956, probably in the autumn of 1955. Don Ward, in his
introduction to the 1973 Sturgeon/Ward collection Sturgeon’s West,
confirms that “The Waiting Thing Inside” is the story that “won an
honorable mention in one of EQMM’s annual prize story competitions.”_

Editor’s introduction to this story from the original magazine
appearance:

“We are happy to welcome the first appearance in _EQMM_ of Theodore
Sturgeon and Don Ward.… Mr. Sturgeon—one of the ‘big names’ in the field
of science fiction—tells us little of his awards and accomplishments,
but those of you who are science fiction fans know all about Ted.
However, here is a little background that you will find revealing. His
primary education, he says, was simply ‘academic parents.’ For his
secondary education, he simply ran away to sea. For his higher
education, he drove a truck, served as a short-order cook, did a stint
of farm labor, and worked in hotels and in advertising. As a
post-graduate course, he got married, and now he and his wife have a son
Robin and a daughter Tandy. His hobbies? Maybe you will be surprised,
and then again maybe you won’t: they include a hot guitar and a hot-rod
truck.

“Don Ward got his Ph.D. more formally—in 1941 in political science at
Syracuse University. He taught history and political science for five
years, then switched to the publishing business where, for the past ten
years, he has been deeply involved in Westerns and in science fiction,
and for seven of those ten years has been editor of _Zane Grey’s Western
Magazine_ for Dell. He is married to a beautiful blonde, has three sons
and one daughter, and his natural habitat is Exurbia.

“Mr. Sturgeon’s and Mr. Ward’s collaborative story is a tale of Western
crime with emphasis on characterization. You will meet a strange
triangle in Delia, Vic, and Roy—with the pent-up passions of long,
shabby years, of calculating, hating, fearing, repressing, and, most
dangerous of all, of waiting …”

“THE DEADLY INNOCENT” by Theodore Sturgeon and Don Ward; first published
in _Mike Shayne Mystery Magazine_, November 1956. Editor’s blurb from
the first page of the original magazine appearance: THIS LOVELY MANTRAP
WOULDN’T HURT A FLY—LANCE WAS NO LITERARY MAN, BUT WHEN HE MET GLAMOROUS
ELOISE, AUTHOR OF BEST-SELLING ROMANCES, HE WAS A GONE GANDER. JUST HOW
FAR GONE, LANCE HAD NO IDEA UNTIL LATER.

“AND NOW THE NEWS …”: first published in _The Magazine of Fantasy and
Science Fiction_, December 195_6_. Editor’s introduction to this story
from the original magazine appearance: “Mr. Sturgeon says that this is a
science fiction story and he can by God prove it. You may decide that
it’s a fantasy … or possibly a mystery … or conceivably a surrealist
view of straight reality. In other words, it’s a story outside of any
ordinary commercial category, a story that creates its own genre—and one
of the most distinguished stories that _F&SF_ has ever had the pleasure
of publishing.” This is strong praise, and I’d like to add that I’ve
long considered this one of the finest short stories ever written by an
American writer. I have also noted, in my book _The 20th Century’s
Greatest Hits_, that with this story “Theodore Sturgeon became the first
modern storyteller to call attention to the enormous impact on Everyman,
on the individual human being, of the rapid evolution of our
communications media during the twentieth century.”

Sturgeon’s introduction to “And Now the News …” in his 1979 collection
_The Golden Helix:_

__It was 1956, and the beginning of a conscious realization that to
limit science fiction to outer space was just that—a limitation, and
that science fiction has and should have as limitless a character as
poetry; further, that it has a real function in inner space. This in
turn led me to a redefinition of science itself, and to an increasing
preoccupation with humanity not only as the subject of science, but as
its source. It has become my joy to find out what makes it tick,
especially when it ticks unevenly_._

_One more thing about this story: I had written to a friend with the
complaint that I hadn’t an idea in my head, and needed one urgently. On
a cold November morning my wife and I opened his response. Twenty-six
story ideas—a paragraph, a sentence, a suggestion, a situation. Clipped
to the pages was a check with a note: “I have the feeling your credit is
bent.’ As my wife and I stared at it and each other—the furnace stopped.
That furnace would stop for only two reasons: the house was warm enough,
or we had just run out of fuel, and it certainly wasn’t warm enough.
Right on cue. We both wept_.

_This story springs from one of the springboards in that package, and
the springboarder’s name is Robert A. Heinlein, and I’m pleased at this
opportunity to acknowledge this single favor among the many he has done
me by his writings and by his—well, his being_.

While I said above that “The Other Man” uses a Heinlein-letter idea as
it springboard, I would describe the genesis of “And Now the News …”
differently. In this case, a good argument could be made for considering
this story as something written “by Theodore Sturgeon and Robert
Heinlein,” because Heinlein in his letter provided the full plot of the
story in great detail—and even its remarkable punch-line. Here is the
“idea” from the letter:

“Once there was a man who could not stand it. First he lost the power to
read and then the headlines did not bother him any longer. Then he lost
the power to understand speech and then the radio could not bother him.
He became quite happy and the wrinkles smoothed out of his face and he
quit being tense and he painted and modelled in clay and danced and
listened to music and enjoyed life.

“Then a clever psychiatrist penetrated his fugue and made him sane
again. Now he could read and listen to the radio and he became aware
again of the Cold War and juvenile delinquency and rapes and rapacity
and et cetera ad nauseam.

“He still couldn’t stand it. He killed quite a number of people before
they got him.”

One reason it is surprising that the plot of this story originates with
Heinlein and not Sturgeon is that Sturgeon himself had for years been an
obsessive listener to the hourly news on the radio. The opening scene of
his 1946 story “Mewhu’s Jet” describes such a man in humorous and
painful detail.

_Another way it’s surprising that this story was plotted by the dean of
modern science fiction, the man who practically invented the medium, is
that Sturgeon had a lot of worries about whether the story would be
bought and published, once he’d finished it, because it’s not exactly a
“science fiction” story and therefore not necessarily appropriate to a
science fiction magazine (or, for other reasons, to any other genre
fiction magazine). TS wrote to Anthony Boucher in May 1956 about “And
Now the News …”: Here’s its history. I wrote it for EQMM’s last contest;
Joe and Bob did me the kindness of holding the final decision on First
Prize until they’d seen it. Bob Mills, having read it now not once but
twice, is gratifyingly enthused, but of course can’t buy by himself. I
don’t know what Fred’s feeling is, but from Lee I got the most
exorbitantly praiseful rejection note I have seen in eighteen years of
professional writing. He too has read it twice now, and (Bob tells me)
feels the same way. Reason for exclusion from EQMM: crime angle not
strong enough for the EQ reader. Reason for second reading: Bob’s
suggestion that it might be slightly recast to increase this: i.e., an
opening “In the matter of the deaths of (four names) …” and a framing of
a private eye (or crime-school student, or M.A. looking for doctorate)
who is hunting the reasons for these reasonless killings. Reason for
ultimate rejection: its length, which Fred felt was too great for EQ;
he’d willingly buy it at 4M if I can do it. I probably can but dammit I
won’t_.

_After its first showing to EQMM I sent it to Horace [Gold, of Galaxy]
and then to John [Campbell, of Astounding] _to see if it could wind up
those goddam advances and leave me clear for you. Horace was afraid of
it because he has been flooded with psychiatric stories and doesn’t know
how the readers would like it; he has regarded all my recent sales to
him as dangerously borderline (in terms of the field and/or previous in
the literary evolution of the form. He asks specifically for it in 9
(now 4) months for re-evaluation; he personally loves it. John rejected
it out of hand with the extraordinarily astute comment: “This is a
splendid and splendidly written story, Ted, but you’re going to have a
hell of time selling it. It isn’t a crime story, it isn’t a romance,
western, fantasy, s-f; it’s something unto itself_. The modern reader
wants to know before he reads something what it is he’s going to read,
for all his demands for originality.” I boggle at his dictum about its
not being s-f. I think it’s definitive s-f, the famous Sturgeon
definition being “a human story investigating a humanly soluble problem,
cast in a narrative which could not be told without the science aspect.”
If psychiatry isn’t a science, chemotherapy is, and I’d like to see you
try this story without chemotherapy_.

_Thence, on Don Ward’s insistence, (Don is partner to a (regrettable)
new literary agency these days, but I go along with it on a trial basis
and because only Don handles my stuff) it went the rounds of some
higherpaying markets. Reaction was consistently favorable, and
consistently no. The essence of most of it (where opinion was expressed
at all) bears out my opinion that there is an interesting parallel to be
drawn between the bawdy stories re monks and nuns circa Bocaccio, and
the rash of psychiatrist jokes now current. These are, I opine, all
expressions of awe and worship, couched in terms of little-boy defiance.
The ironic cast of AND NOW THE NEWS speaks too pointedly of the
psychiatrist who does everything right and destroys the patient; editors
seem timid about this, never for themselves, always on behalf of their
readers. One of the most entrancing examples of this is the editor who
rejected the story without explanation, and then worriedly looked me up
later to buy beer and explain that it was (for once, he asserted) a
personal thing; that the story disturbed him because someone very close
to him had been in and out of institutions for years and he was full up
to here with psychotherapists and their cant, their superiority and
“infallibility.” Especially Freudians. “I would publish a story any
time,” he told me gravely, “—matter of fact, I’m actively looking for
one—which destroys the myth of the infallibility of the Freudian
analyst.” I was speechless with astonishment, and still reverberate like
a struck gong. This man is so reverent and awed that he couldn’t recall
what he was confessing to me, or what about!_

_Don Ward sent the story back to Bob Mills for the EQMM second look, and
Bob returned it to me “Wet,” he said, “with my tears.” Don wanted it
back to recirculate in the slicks, but this time I said no; you hadn’t
seen it yet and should. Not only would its purchase square my account
with Mercury [F&SF’s publisher], I think I’d be happier to see it in
your readers’ hands than anyone else’s anywhere. They are many and
varied, those readers, but the one thing they have in common is that
their reverence and awe is more highly placed than that of the general
mags, and I don’t think they’ll be hurt. Also, more of ’em appreciate
cadence in writing than other readers in the field; I won’t deny that
that matters to me_.

_(On rereading the above I find I neglected to mention JWC [Campbell]’s
other reason for rejection: he would like a rewrite making the
story-focus a matter of the protagonist’s “genetic inability to adjust,”
a package of goods he’s promulgating these days, which drives me wild.)_

_Now in the event that you find this story acceptable BUT, and if that
but lies in the area of your logotype, I can save the time of a
coast-to-coast interchange [Boucher lived in California] with these
suggestions: If you really feel this yarn is not close enough to
conventional science fiction (my God what a phrase to use!) I can fix it
up in one of two ways: Dishonestly (in terms of my own definition) by
making the car a turbine job, the train a monorail, the radios and TV
sets more advanced (RCA’s picture-on-the-wall flat set, for example); in
short, put the story In the near future and therefore in the s-f matrix.
I did this kind of job only once before, adding a space-ship to
HURRICANE TRIO [in early 1955] to get it into Galaxy; it was a slick
before that [a non-genre story aimed at and submitted to “slick”
magazine markets], rejected all over—awe and reverence again. Eleanor
Stierham [evidently the editor of a woman’s magazine, circa 1947]: “The
woman doesn’t exist who would take such a risk.” Bull’s balls! HT was a
true story and I was there! Anyway, if you think an invisible mending
job such as this would do, just say the word. Keep the ms and I’ll do
you a work-sheet with inserts, keeping your labor to a minimum. I have
the carbon_.

_Honestly: _By framing the story pretty much as is by describing a great
plague of suicide-murders which overcomes modern man [notice the
accuracy of Sturgeon’s and Heinlein’s off-handed “prediction”!!] due to
the creeping gangrene of cultural terror, and this as the first recorded
case-history, which, ironically enough, contains both the cause (as
MacLyle describes it) and the cure (his kind of retreat). But this will
cost you_ 2,000 more words_.

_If you have an alternative, I’ll listen with all my ears. But you must
know that for once my art and my pocketbook concur, and my preference
and desire is to see it printed as is_.

__A final note on the whole subject of psychiatry: I am keeping this_
_very_ _quiet, for several excellent reasons, and therefore exact your
confidence: I have been since January in therapy_ and with a Freudian
analyst. She was found for me by Bob Lindner [see the end of the note on
“The Other Man,” above] just before he died, and is working with me for
virtually nothing because Lindner felt I was worth saving, may he live
forever. Anyway, she thinks the story is brilliant and is only amused at
the suggestion that anyone might feel it is an attack on her and her
colleagues. A wonderful delineation of humanity’s widespread fear of
what people might think. Being afraid of what they do think is
poltroonish enough: but this …!_

_If you bounce it I’ll still love you_.

_The “history” above was sent to Anthony Boucher along with the
manuscript of this story. In a separate letter to “My dear Tony” sent in
the same package, TS referred to the enclosed AND NOW THE NEWS and said,
After the last page I have appended a note. I don’t intend for it to
sway you if the story doesn’t, but there are things you should know
about it which make far more sense after you’ve read the story than
before. So I enjoin you not to read that note until you’ve seen the
story. The two-page “note” begins with no salutation, but the
self-conscious lines: What the hell’s an author’s opinion worth? Does it
matter to anyone that I like it? Then a paragraph break and: Well, aside
from that: here’s its history_.

The name of this story’s protagonist, MacLyle, derives from two of the
pseudonyms Robert Heinlein used when writing a lot of magazine fiction
in the early 1940s, Lyle Monroe and Anson MacDonald.

“THE GIRL HAD GUTS”: first published in _Venture Science Fiction_,
January 1957.

A radio dramatization of this story aired on WBAI-FM in New York City
sometime in the 1960s.

“The Girl Had Guts” appeared in the first issue of _Venture_, a magazine
published by the same publisher as _The Magazine of Fantasy and Science
Fiction_ which “put a higher priority on action-adventure sf than did
its companion,” according to _The Science Fiction Encyclopedia_. The
editor was Robert P. Mills. Sturgeon had stories in four of the ten
issues _Venture_ published during its short year-and-a-half run. He
contributed a book review column to the four issues of _Venture_
published in 1958.

“THE OTHER CELIA”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_, March
1957. Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine
appearance: SOMETHING DRASTIC SHOULD HAPPEN TO ALL SNOOPERS—BUT NOTHING
AS SHOCKING AND FRIGHTFUL AS THIS!

This is considered a major Sturgeon story by several of his critics.
David Pringle, in his introduction to the 1987 collection _A Touch of
Sturgeon_, points out that Slim, the “fumbling, voyeuristic” protagonist
of “The Other Celia” is “one of society’s outcasts,” like the
protagonists of _More than Human, The Dreaming Jewels_, and “Bright
Segment.” “Alienation,” Pringle writes in the same essay, “is as strong
and abiding a theme in Sturgeon’s work as is union or love.” Pringle
goes on to say, perceptively, “There is a sense in which _all_
Sturgeon’s protagonists are adolescents, whatever their stated ages.”

“The Other Celia” is one of three particularly fine Sturgeon stories
written in the mid-1950s that take place in a boarding house or rooming
house. The other two are “The Claustrophile” and “The (Widget), the
(Wadget), and Boff.”

“The Other Celia” has been anthologized several times as a “horror”
story; it is also a fantasy in the tradition of _Unknown_ magazine,
which Sturgeon wrote for (and regarded highly) at the beginning of his
career. But although the denouement is certainly horrific, and the
circumstance the story focuses on (Celia’s two skins or bodies) is quite
fantastic and/or science fictional, the essential point Sturgeon makes
here, as in much of his work, is that if we look at the human world
closely (as this story’s protagonist does in his unhealthily compulsive
way) and realistically, we will find more strangeness than is commonly
acknowledged or assumed. Shakespeare’s line from _Hamlet_, “There are
more things in Heaven and Earth, Horatio, than are dreamt of in your
philosophy,” is a good summation of Sturgeon’s primary theme,
particularly in stories like this that are told in a realistic style or
voice. Sturgeon’s own, well-metered, version of Hamlet’s comment to
Horatio can be found in these lines from “The Other Celia”:

_And when he came to think about it, as ultimately he did, it occurred
to Slim that within the anthill in which we all live and have our being,
enough privacy can be exacted to allow for all sorts of strangeness in
the members of society, providing the strangeness is not permitted to
show. If it is a man’s pleasure to sleep upside-down like a bat, and if
he so arranges his life that no one ever sees him sleeping, or his
sleeping-place, why, bat-like he may sleep all the days of his life_.

Science fiction writer and critic Algis Budrys (writing in an amateur
magazine called _Science Fiction Forum_) said of this story shortly
after its publication: “ ‘The Other Celia’ represent’s _Galaxy_’s high
point for the year. In a way, it seems to be the quintessence of
Sturgeon to date. He has pared his human interaction down to just two
characters, who never meet and never speak, either to themselves or to
the reader. Still there is conflict, action, development, suspense,
characterization, and mood … conveyed by wordless symbols, the way the
Chinese paint.”

Sturgeon’s “maunderings” (typewritten notes to himself, trying to
develop story ideas and plots) indicate that after writing the first
3/8ths of this story, probably sometime early in 1956, he tried hard to
develop it into a much longer and more complex story—i.e., to find a way
to use these 3,000 words he had already written (up to the point where
Slim first discovers Celia’s box of typing paper) as the start of a
novelette he could sell to a magazine for more money than a shorter tale
would bring him. These notes do suggest that the idea of Celia’s
body-transfer lifestyle didn’t come to him until long after he wrote the
beginning of the story as we know it.

“AFFAIR WITH A GREEN MONKEY”: first published in _Venture Science
Fiction_, May 1957. Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original
magazine appearance: LOOLYO WAS—DIFFERENT. WHICH WAS WHY FRITZ DIDN’T
WORRY ABOUT LEAVING ALMA ALONE WITH HIM. ALMA WORRIED, THOUGH—SHE
DISCOVERED THAT THE “DIFFERENCE” COULD KILL HER …

_In August 1957, in a proposal for the short story collection A Touch of
Strange, Sturgeon wrote of this story: Though using a science fiction
device, it is actually a contemporary study, perhaps a fable. A
calculated shocker which is still drawing mail to Venture, though it
appeared in the May issue_.

A radio dramatization of this story aired on WBAI-FM in New York City
sometime in the 1960s.

“THE POD IN THE BARRIER”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_,
September 1957. Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original
magazine appearance: IT WAS A WALL IN SPACE … WITH NO WAY TO GO OVER OR
UNDER OR AROUND OR THROUGH IT … AND IT WAS THOSE OUTSIDE WHO WERE THE
PRISONERS!

I have noted before (in the story notes on “Blabbermouth” in Volume III
of this series) that one of Sturgeon’s characteristic and almost unique
contributions to science fiction is his recognition and contemplation of
specific human emotions as energy fields or energy beings that sometimes
have enormous yet subtle and mysterious powers to affect aspects of
physical reality not usually perceived as subject to psychological
forces. Virginia’s ability—in “The Pod in the Barrier”—to “generate
clouds of retroactive doubt” is an example of this … and in this story
turns out to be the vehicle for rescuing an overcrowded Earth from
imminent self-destruction (even though it’s a personality trait that
others in the story find quite maddening). “The Pod in the Barrier” got
another mention in the Volume III notes when I said it can be considered
“an extremely sophisticated rewrite” of Sturgeon’s 1942 story “Medusa.”

_In his proposal for A Touch of Strange, TS said of “Pod”: Space opus,
with a “different” treatment and an original theory on the nature of mu
mesons. It may make history: it contains a perfectly sound formula for
the power field of a cold fusion technique.… Actually, it was written
far too recently for seasoned judgment; it could be far better or far
worse than the author thinks it is_.

An additional note on Sturgeon’s two non-science-fiction novels
published in 1956:

_The King and Four Queens_ was a paperback Western published at the end
of the year to tie in with the release of a new film starring Clark
Gable. The paperback is not presented as a novelization of the movie,
though the movie is mentioned on the back cover and Gable can be seen on
a horse in the cover painting. Instead on the title page is the line “an
original Western.” Both title page and cover note that Sturgeon’s novel
is “based on a story by Margaret Fitts.” Clearly he was hired by the
publisher (Dell) to write this novel expanding on the story that had
provided the basis for the film.

_I, Libertine_ was a historical novel set in 18th century London,
published by Ballantine Books in August 1956 and written by Theodore
Sturgeon (though published under the pseudonym Frederick R. Ewing) in 30
days in June and July 1956. This book began as a hoax perpetrated by a
popular late night (1:00–5:30 A.M.) New York City radio personality
named Jean Shepherd. According to a story in the Sept. 3, 1956 issue of
_Newsweek:_ “Shepherd’s greatest fraudulent success has been the pushing
of a nonexistent book entitled _I, Libertine_, written by an imaginary
author.… As a punishment for such ‘list lovers’ among the day people as
booksellers and publishers, Shepherd urged his listeners [called the
“night people”] to request the volume at their bookstore. Inquiries were
promptly recorded in 26 states and three foreign countries. In a short
time Shepherd fans reported back with the news that they had heard
cocktail-party people claiming to have read it.”

According to a letter from Sturgeon to _Chicago Tribune_ writer Vincent
Starrett on July 16, 1956, the book’s title and the author’s name were
invented by listeners when Shepherd announced, “Tonight we’re going to
create something. I want you to call me up and give me a book title, and
an author’s name, and we’ll pick the best of ’em and plug that as the
book of the age.” _One day last month_, Sturgeon told Starrett, _I took
Shepherd to lunch with_ [publisher] _Ian Ballantine, and we told him
about the thing. Ian blurted, “I’ll publish it!” and I said, “I’ll write
it!”_ Sturgeon then explains that the book came to be a historical novel
when Shepherd’s literary agent (he was included in the book contract,
though Sturgeon did all the writing) heard about the Ballantine offer
and asked him what the book was about. _Shep, never at a loss for words,
said, “Why, it’s about this Madison Avenue character, see, but in the
eighteenth century. An operator, you understand, but sincere. So he …”
As soon as he left he raced to a phone and called me. “Hey, I found out
what the book’s about …”_ Sturgeon looked through his _Britannica
Encyclopedia_ and _like the answer to a prayer came Elizabeth Chudleigh,
courtesan, simultaneously the wife_ of the Earl of Bristol and the Duke
of Kingston.… Around her I built my tale, using my Madison Ave.
character as protagonist. It isn’t a great book but it’s fun, it’s as
authentic as most of its genre and more so than many, and it’s
self-consistent. And I still don’t know how the hell I did it.

_In an Afterword in I, Libertine, Sturgeon (as Ewing) wrote, In short,
this is a fable, written by and for the dilettante of the fabulous. It
was extraordinarily easy and pleasant to write and it is hoped that it
will be correspondingly easy and pleasant to read. He acknowledges T. H.
White’s book The Age of Scandal as a primary source, and goes on to say:
Theodore Sturgeon assisted nobly with the research. Mr. Jean Shepherd
pushed and pushed at the author until he was, in the world of books,
born; and last mentioned but first of all, the Night People whose
battle-cry is Excelsior, and whose humor and forbearance are really
responsible for the work_.

The back cover of the paperback (the book was simultaneously published
in hardcover as well) includes a fictitious biography of the author,
Ewing, and a photograph of Jean Shepherd doing his best to look like a
retired commander of the Royal Navy who finished the novel while
stationed in Rhodesia as a civil servant. _Newsweek_ reports that
180,000 copies of the hastily-published book were distributed in late
August 1956. The novel was also issued by a Canadian publisher and went
through two printings in a British edition.

Among Sturgeon’s papers is a carbon of a letter to Shepherd on 8/30/56
expressing annoyance at Jean being quoted in _Life_ and the _New York
Journal-American_ claiming that he, Shepherd, actually wrote the novel.

[]
