[]

[]

Theodore Sturgeon playing guitar to entertain fellow conventioneers at
the 1962 World Science Fiction Convention in Chicago, at which he was
Guest of Honor. Photograph by Dean Grennell.

[]

Copyright © 2005 the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Previously
published materials copyright © 1958, 1959, 1960, 1961 by Theodore
Sturgeon and the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust, except “The Man Who
Figured Everything,” which is copyright © 1959 by Don Ward and Theodore
Sturgeon and the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. All rights reserved.
No portion of this book, except for brief review, may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise—without written permission of the publisher.

Published by
North Atlantic Books
P.O. Box 12327
Berkeley, California 94712

Cover design by Paula Morrison

_The Man Who Lost the Sea_ is sponsored by the Society for the Study of
Native Arts and Sciences, a nonprofit educational corporation whose
goals are to develop an educational and cross-cultural perspective
linking various scientific, social, and artistic fields; to nurture a
holistic view of arts, sciences, humanities, and healing; and to publish
and distribute literature on the relationship of mind, body, and nature.

North Atlantic Books’ publications are available through most
bookstores. For further information, visit our website at
www.northatlanticbooks.com or call 800-733-3000.

The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:

Sturgeon, Theodore.
     The man who lost the sea / by Theodore Sturgeon; edited by Paul
Williams ; foreword by Jonathan Lethem.
         p. cm.—(The complete stories of Theodore Sturgeon ; v. 10)
     Summary: “The tenth in a series of volumes of collected stories by
noted science fiction writer Theodore Sturgeon. Features stories written
between 1958 and 1961”—Provided by publisher.
     eISBN: 978-1-58394-754-8
     1. Science fiction, American.  I. Williams, Paul, 1948–  II. Title.
     PS3569.T875A6 2004
     813′.54—dc22

2004024132

v3.1



EDITOR’S NOTE


THEODORE HAMILTON STURGEON was born February 26, 1918, and died May 8,
1985. This is the tenth of a series of volumes that will collect all of
his short fiction of all types and all lengths shorter than a novel. The
volumes and the stories within the volumes are organized chronologically
by order of composition (insofar as it can be determined). This tenth
volume contains stories written between spring 1957 and autumn 1960.

Preparation of each of these volumes would not be possible without the
hard work and invaluable participation of Noël Sturgeon, Debbie Notkin,
and our publishers, Lindy Hough and Richard Grossinger. I would also
like to thank, for their significant assistance with this volume,
Jonathan Lethem, the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust, Marion Sturgeon,
Jayne Williams, Ralph Vicinanza, Tina Krauss, Dixon Chandler, Cindy Lee
Berryhill, T. V. Reed, and all of you who have expressed your interest
and support. For those who would like more information about Theodore
Sturgeon and the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust, the website address
for the Trust is: http://www.theodoresturgeontrust.com/

BOOKS BY THEODORE STURGEON

_Without Sorcery_ (_1948_)

_The Dreaming Jewels_ [aka _The Synthetic Man]_ (_1950_)

_More Than Human_ (_1953_)

_E Pluribus Unicorn_ (_1953_)

_Caviar_ (_1955_)

_A Way Home_ (_1955_)

_The King and Four Queens_ (_1956_)

_I, Libertine_ (_1956_)

_A Touch of Strange_ (_1958_)

_The Cosmic Rape_ [aka _To Marry_ Medusa](_1958_)

_Aliens 4_ (_1959_)

_Venus Plus X_ (_1960_)

_Beyond_ (_1960_)

_Some of Your Blood_ (_1961_)

_Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea_ (_1961_)

_The Player on the Other Side_ (_1963_)

_Sturgeon in Orbit_ (_1964_)

_Starshine_ (_1966_)

_The Rare Breed_ (_1966_)

_Sturgeon Is Alive and Well …_ (_1971_)

_The Worlds of Theodore Sturgeon_ (_1972_)

_Sturgeon’s West_ (with Don Ward) (_1973_)

_Case and the Dreamer_ (_1974_)

_Visions and Venturers_ (_1978_)

_Maturity_ (_1979_)

_The Stars Are the Styx_ (_1979_)

_The Golden Helix_ (_1979_)

_Alien Cargo_ (_1984_)

_Godbody_ (_1986_)

_A Touch of Sturgeon_ (_1987_)

_The [Widget], the [Wadget], and Boff_ (_1989_)

_Argyll_ (_1993_)

_Star Trek, The Joy Machine_ (with James Gunn) (_1996_)

THE COMPLETE STORIES SERIES

1. _The Ultimate Egoist_ (_1994_)

2. _Microcosmic God_ (_1995_)

3. _Killdozer!_ (_1996_)

4. _Thunder and Roses_ (_1997_)

5. _The Perfect Host_ (_1998_)

6. _Baby Is Three_ (_1999_)

7. _A Saucer of Loneliness_ (_2000_)

8. _Bright Segment_ (_2002_)

9. _And Now the News …_ (_2003_)

10. _The Man Who Lost the Sea_ (_2005_)

11. _The Nail and the Oracle_ (_2007_)

12. _Slow Sculpture_ (_2009_)

13. _Case and the Dreamer_ (_2010_)



CONTENTS


_Cover_

_Title Page_

_Copyright_

Editor’s Note

_Other Books by This Author_

Foreword by Jonathan Lethem

A Crime for Llewellyn

It Opens the Sky

A Touch of Strange

The Comedian’s Children

The Graveyard Reader

The Man Who Told Lies

The Man Who Lost the Sea

The Man Who Figured Everything (with Don Ward)

Like Young

Night Ride

Need

How to Kill Aunty

Tandy’s Story

Story Notes by Paul Williams



FOREWORD


By Jonathan Lethem

I never met Theodore Sturgeon, but I did have a chance to introduce him
to my father, in a Sturgeonish fashion. Paul Williams and I were
visiting Woodstock, New York, on our way from a science fiction
convention in Massachusetts. In Woodstock we were to meet my father, who
had driven to pick me up from and return me to his cabin in the
Catskills. In Woodstock Paul and I met Noël Sturgeon, Theodore
Sturgeon’s daughter. We were an hour or so early for the rendezvous with
my dad, and, of course, more than a decade late to hope for an encounter
in the flesh with Theodore Sturgeon.

This was in 1993, at the start of North Atlantic Books’ noble publishing
marathon _The Complete Stories of Theodore Sturgeon_, of which this is
the tenth volume. At that time the project was a whisper or a promise.
Or perhaps I should say it was a drive in the woods, for that is what it
was that day. We went for a drive in the woods and Paul and I
contemplated the territory of Sturgeon’s life in his Woodstock years,
with Noël’s eloquent guidance, her narration and her silences. She led
us down backroads to contemplate the place where Sturgeon’s writing
shack had been hidden. We absorbed the presence of his absence, and I
absorbed the delicate weight of his daughter’s spoken and unspoken
memories, and those of her father’s friend Paul. I remembered what I
knew of Sturgeon, the stories when I’d first read them as a kid. Noël
spoke of her childhood with an artist father, and I thought of my own.

Then we went back into Woodstock and met my father in a café. By the
time I was able to introduce Noël to my father I felt I was returning a
favor, or at least trying to. I felt that I was completing a circle.
Leaving Paul and Noël behind, driving off into the Catskills, I spoke to
my father of Sturgeon, and I spoke to him differently. That night I
slept beside my father in two sleeping bags in a cabin lit only by
candles and by the stars, and told him more of my life as an adult than
I ever had. I was still with Sturgeon, though I was alone with my father
and had never been with Sturgeon at all.

These stories are like that: they speak of human beings connecting with
other human beings or attempting to do so at great odds, and at odd
angles; of human beings failing at or sabotaging their own best efforts
for fear that what they want most doesn’t make any sense, or that the
odds are too great; of human beings learning again and again that their
thin howling selves are part of a chorus which stands shoulder to
shoulder in a traffic jam, a mob scene of lonely selves, of members of a
great estranged family of beings. Sturgeon wrote miraculous short
stories. Some fly, some stumble, but all are miraculous. By that I mean
he always wrote of miracles, of deliverance and miracles and of a lust
for completion in an incomplete world. He wrote of needs and their
denial, with such undisguised longing and anger that his stories are
caustic with emotion. His stories are carved in need. Many of the fine
examples gathered here in Volume 10 are by happy coincidence the first
ones Sturgeon wrote in those woods; he moved his family to Woodstock in
1959.

Paul Williams once said, in conversation, that Sturgeon’s “only method
was the tour de force.” That has long seemed to me the only critical
remark on Sturgeon’s art that needs making. It is impossible to imagine
the work arising from anything but the peculiar circumstances of its
making. Sturgeon found his urgency directed in becoming, in bursts of
stylistic juice, the John Dos Passos, the William Faulkner, the Ring
Lardner, the James Thurber, the Virginia Woolf of science fiction. The
pulp form gave him the motifs of transcendence and metamorphosis, and
the imperative of optimism, he needed to cut against what seems to me an
instinctive morbidity. See how his imagination collapses into the gothic
in the non-SF tales; alternately, consider how _The Man Who Lost The
Sea_, the finest literary fugue this side of James Salter’s _Dusk_,
relies on its rocket. Yet Sturgeon’s work is the opposite of Pop Art; he
never predicted much; his cheerleading’s embarrassing. He can seem
misplaced in science fiction; I’d argue he’d have been misplaced
anywhere. And would he have written his masterpieces without that form
to write against? I doubt it.

The results—well, they’re as impossible as the foregoing suggests.
Theodore Sturgeon’s best stories are triumphant Golems. They stride tall
while they shake off the entreaties of the clay of the battleground of
which they were formed. They have nothing but their voices.

—Jonathan Lethem
   Brooklyn, New York



A CRIME FOR LLEWELLYN


He had a grey little job clerking in the free clinic at the hospital,
doing what he’d done the day he started, and that was nineteen years
back. His name was Llewellyn, and Ivy Shoots called him Lulu.

Ivy took care of him. He’d lived with Ivy ever since she was an owlish
intellectual with an uncertain, almost little girl look about her and he
was a scared, mixed up adolescent wilting in the interim between
high-school and his first job. Ivy was in several senses his maiden
experience—first date, first drink, first drunk, and first hangover in a
strange hotel in a strange city accompanied by a strange girl. Strange
or not—and she was—she was his Secret.

A man like Lulu needs a Secret. A sheltered background consisting of
positive morality, tea-cozies, spinster aunts and the violent contrast
of eighteen months as a public charge—after the aunts had burned to
death, uninsured—had convinced him that he was totally incapable of
coping with a world in which everybody else knew all the angles. So he
fell joyfully into the arrangement with Ivy Shoots and the Secret that
went with it.

He was small and he was pudgy, and he wasn’t bright, and his eyes
weren’t too good, and the very idea of his stealing a nickel or crossing
in the middle of the block was ridiculous. It seemed to him that all the
men around him emanated the virtue of sin—the winks and whistles at the
girls, the Monday tales _(boy did I tie one on Saturday night)_, the
legends of easy conquests and looseness and casual infidelity, the dirty
jokes, and the oaths and expletives—and because they seemed to have no
scruples they kept their stature as men in a world of men.

In this, Lulu could easily have drowned. Only his Secret kept him
afloat. He told it to no one, partly because he sensed instinctively
that he would treasure it more if he kept it to himself, and partly
because he knew he would not be believed even if he proved it. He could
listen contentedly to the boasting of the men he envied, thinking _if
you only knew!_ and _you think that’s something!_ hugging to himself all
the while the realization that not one among them had committed the
enormity of living in sin as he was doing.

When he first went to work at the hospital, he was the youngest clerk in
the crowd. He had felt enormously superior to the other sinners who with
all their triumphs had not been able to dye themselves as black as he
had succeeded in doing. As the years went by, and he became one of the
older ones, he patronized the young ones instead and pitied his
contemporaries.

All this, of course, took place in his most inward self. On the surface
he was an inconspicuous individual who was laughed at when noticed—which
was seldom—and he took both the laughter and the anonymity as envious
compliments. _You don’t know it and you’d never guess, but you’re
talking to a pretty gay dog_.

Life with Ivy was, in some respects, as methodically guarded, as hedged
about with limitations as his infancy with the aunts had been. In all
their years together it never occurred to him that there was anything
very unusual about the fact that they never entertained at home nor, for
that matter, went anywhere together. She had her friends, and he had his
acquaintances, and they seldom discussed them.

As a matter of fact they talked about very little. Ivy Shoots was a
statistical typist, a strange breed to begin with. She was capable of
meticulous accuracy without concentration and she spent her days rapidly
typing long lists of bond issues and proofing drafts of catalogue
numbers and patent listings.

She would arrive home within a few seconds of 5:45 each evening. Lulu,
who went to work at six in the morning, would be waiting, with no
variation in the pattern. Unvaryingly the potatoes would be on to boil.
He had done the marketing; she cooked. They ate; he washed up. It was
all very painless and almost completely automatic. He had eight shopping
lists and she had eight menus, so that by using one each day they never
ate the same food on successive Wednesdays.

He took out the laundry on Mondays, the dry-cleaning on Tuesdays and
picked both bundles up on Fridays. She made the bed and handled all of
the money. He dusted and swept and put the garbage out. On Saturday
mornings she left the house at eight. Sunday evenings precisely at nine
she returned.

He spent Saturday mornings cleaning the house, Saturday afternoons at
the movies (a children’s matinee, with 5 Cartoons 5), and all day Sunday
listening to the radio tuned in loud. Ivy couldn’t abide the radio, so
out of consideration for her he used earphones on weekday evenings. And
on weekday evenings she read novels—each a book club selection—from the
lending library in the drugstore downstairs.

There were two things in all his life with her which he never opened.
They were his pay envelope and the black steel box on the night table.
Opening the first was unthinkable, and the second impossible, since she
kept the key on a ribbon around her neck. Each of these closed matters
was indicative of the total way her mind worked.

She pooled her wages with his pay envelope and kept track of every
penny. Lulu neither smoked nor drank. He walked to and from work and
brought his lunch in a paper bag. He had no use for cash and—except for
his movie money on Saturdays—never touched it. Laundry and groceries
were handled by monthly bill—and paid for by mail. It is the literal
truth that on nine hundred and ninety-one successive weeks he never once
broke the seal on his pay envelope.

There was nothing in such self-control not compatible with the
effortless routine of his life, and he put all temptation behind and
away from him—along with U.S. foreign policy, baseball games, and the
mating of the sapsucker, Ivy’s whereabouts on weekends, and all the
other world’s works in which he did not participate. Perhaps it would be
more correct to say he simply filed it away, not so much forgotten as
simply unremembered.

So life proceeded for nineteen years while wars and seasons crept by
unnoticed, touching him no more than ambition or variety did. His life
was a quiet succession of children’s matinees, with 5 Cartoons 5, of
work in the morning and potatoes to peel at five in the afternoon, and,
it may even be noted, the perfunctory performance, in the speechless
dark, on three Tuesdays and three Fridays in each month, of an activity
most essential to his secret status.

Evening after quiet evening was spent simply with the radio droning
through the earphones into Lulu’s lethargic and semi-conscious mind,
while Ivy Shoots sat across the room from him in a straight-backed chair
with her novel in one hand and her balsam inhalator—she was perpetually
entering or leaving a head-cold—in the other. Whether or not they were
happy is an argument for people who like definitions, but it can hardly
be denied that a good many of the less restricted are unhappier than
Lulu Llewellyn and Ivy Shoots.

In the nineteenth year of their arrangement, Ivy Shoots had a sort of
colic of the conscience. Maybe it had something to do with the
poor-man’s Yoga she was hobbying at the time—a pseudo-mystic cult which
dictated that the higher self, being chained to earth by lies and sin,
must confess All to be cleaned and truly free itself. Anyway, she
started to brood, and she brooded for three days and nights, and then
one evening she began breathing hard—which made her cough—and at last
came out with it: “Lulu, you’re a good man. A _really_ good man. You’ve
never done anything wrong in your whole life. You couldn’t. So you
needn’t be ashamed.”

Lulu was, of course, no end startled. He pushed back his left earphone
and blinked. “I’m not ashamed,” he said. Then, in utter amazement, he
watched her leap up, and go scrabbling for the key of her black box. In
a moment she had opened the box and was fanning through the papers it
contained. In another moment she had found the paper that was to explode
a bomb-shell in Lulu’s quiet life. She simply crossed the room and
handed it to him.

“Well, read it,” she said.

He blinked and did as he was told. And he honestly couldn’t understand
it, it was a legal form, apparently—all filled out with names and dates
and witnesses and the like. He got as far as realizing that and then his
mind refused to go on. He waved the paper and said inanely, “What’s
this?”

She expelled her breath slowly, looked up at the ceiling as if to remind
herself that she could not expect him to understand all at once, and
them gently took the certificate from him. She held it so that he could
see it clearly, while she pointed out its significance. She explained
each part to him—his signature, hers, the witnesses, the place, the
official stamp, and finally the date, some nineteen years before. He
nodded as each brick of structure fell into place, right up until she
said, “… so you see, we were married that night.” At that last point he
looked up.

“No we weren’t,” he said. “It’s some kind of mistake!”

“But I tell you we were, Lulu.” She tapped the paper. “We were.”

“No we weren’t,” he said again, but now with all of the assurance gone
from his voice.

“Do you remember that night? Try to remember. Think back.”

“Well, it was a long time ago.”

“The very next day when you woke up there in the hotel. Start then.”

“Well …” He tapped the paper, his eyes wide, and she nodded. He said,
“Oh.” And after a bit, his only defense, his only reference: “Fellow on
the radio said …” He stopped, trying to remember exactly what the fellow
had said. “He said you can’t do that get married all at once, drinking
and all.”

“It happened nineteen years ago, Lulu.”

Lulu sat looking at the marriage certificate. It began to blur before
his eyes. He whispered, “Why did you do it, Ivy?”

“I wanted to get married, that’s all. I couldn’t … do it any other way.”

It wasn’t really an answer to the question he had asked her, which
concerned only him and an old piece of paper—not her at all. But he
found he could not repeat the question and after a moment he didn’t even
try. She was nineteen years in the past, saying, “I was going to tell
you, but I was afraid. I didn’t know you, Lulu—the way I do now. I
didn’t know if you’d be angry or hate me, or leave, or what. I was going
to tell you,” she added after a pause, “but I waited so I could be sure
you wouldn’t be angry. And in a week …” She closed her eyes. “… you were
glad. You said that. It was the only thing bad you ever did, or thought
you did. It was the only thing. And now you see you didn’t do anything
bad after all. I—I know it must be a shock, but …” She shrugged then,
opened her eyes, and smiled at him.

“Well!” she said briskly, “I’m glad you know now. At least you won’t
have that on your conscience. You!” she added, with the completely
sincere but naive fondness that often seems only a hair’s breadth from
scorn. “You doing _anything_ bad. The very idea!”

He sat in his usual chair in his usual plump slump, with his feet in his
shoes—he wiggled them to be sure—and his heart going not much faster
than usual. He was all the parts of a man, alive and feeling, with the
same name as before and the same weight cradled the same way on the bent
springs of the same chair. Yet he could not have been more different had
he become six feet tall or shrunk to midget size, or even if he had
changed species and become a squirrel or a philodendron.

He just sat there wondering numbly where he had changed, and why so
drastic a change seemed not to show somewhere. Something inside him had
crumpled, but its precise nature eluded him. He put his hand on his
round little stomach as if to find it, but everything felt the same to
his touch.

_Why did you do it, Ivy?_

But he couldn’t ask the question aloud. Instead he stood up suddenly,
and because of some freak lack of control, his voice came out harsh,
whiplike. “Ivy, you let me think …”

She whirled to face him, paling.

He was sorry his voice had done that, he was sorry he had frightened
her. He was bewildered by the fact that he felt fright too. He opened
his lips to speak, and saw the absolute attention her sudden fright had
gained him. He knew then that his next words would be words she would
never forget. They came, and they were, “I guess I might’s well turn in
now.” He shambled past her, saw the fright leave, and the color return
to her face.

“Yes, you must be tired,” she said cheerfully. “I felt funny there for a
second. I guess what I need is a bite to eat!” She began to trim the
crusts off some bread slices and to hum a no-tune she was fond of. Lulu
had heard it for so long he was unaware of whether or not he liked it.
It was a random sequence of notes within a range of about four tones.
But unlike any other music, it was phrased not by bars nor melodic
units, but by ladylike sniffs from her perpetually dripping nose.

Lulu found himself watching that nose as he slowly undressed. It was
slightly bulbous at the tip, reddened and highly flexible, the results
of years of blotting and mopping and repeated testing during the rare
times when the drip was absent. He looked at the nose and he said to
himself, _nineteen years_, and somehow that made sense to him. He got
into bed and lay down to stare up at the ceiling until she retired.

She stopped by the bedroom door. She had the black box nestling in the
crook of one elbow and a small sandwich in the other hand. She chewed
and swallowed and then patted the black steel affectionately with the
sandwich.

“Don’t you ever forget, Lulu! Anybody tries to make out you did a wrong
thing in your whole life, this box has all the proof in the world it’s
not so.”

She came in and put the box down on the night table, and patted it
again. She hummed for a moment longer, then took another bite out of the
sandwich and said, “My, I feel so _good_ now that it’s in the open.
Lulu, I’m filing that paper under M in the writing-desk. Don’t forget—in
case you ever need it for anything. It doesn’t need to be in the box any
more.”

She washed up her things and put them on the rack to dry and after a
while she came to bed. It wasn’t Tuesday night or Friday night. It was
Sunday night. They went to sleep without talking.

Lulu went to work on Monday. It was pretty bad. The talk was the same as
every Monday and that was what made it so bad.

 … _about the ninth beer I was_ …

 … _only a high-school kid, Joe, but she_ …

 … _summagun rolled just one too many nines, so I_ …

 … _so I_ …

 … _pair of_ …

 … _Roseland_ …

Pretty bad. It washed and splashed and flooded around him, trickled
away, and then came back, foaming and roaring to engulf him for the
second time. He found that the Secret, in taking its departure, had left
all its reflexes behind. He couldn’t unlearn his defenses. Any anecdote
which dealt in coarse, boastful fashion with sex, sin or scandal, he had
been accustomed to counterbalance with a hidden loftiness, and from that
take his pleasure.

But how could he experience pleasure when he had to remember that black
steel box with its damnable certificate? Each time it happened he was
emptied, and emptied again, and each time, it all had to happen again.
_But we got married, we got married_, he told and told himself, and was
then without sin to call his own.

Tuesday was much worse. The hairy-chested histories were fewer, of
course, having nothing as eventful as a Saturday night to draw upon. But
they were, by contrast, more unusual and unexpected. Lulu never knew
when a charity-patient’s face would appear in the grated arch above his
desk, and give evidence of some riotous sin solely by its scars and
contours, or drop before him some virile obscenity which he might repeat
but could never hope to conceive. And when these things happened he was
caught up in his hellish little chain and reflex, the lofty pleasure,
the recollection and the emptying.

What made it so much worse was that, unlike Monday, Tuesday’s misery
continued after quitting time. To be strictly accurate, the misery
_re-emerged_ after quitting time, after everything else, the homecoming,
the potatoes, the dinner, the dishes, the radio and the reading. His
last activity with Ivy on Tuesdays—and Fridays, except for every
fourth—had regularized itself into a commonplace, and destroyed all
piquancies but one. And that one had been Lulu’s alone, his own special
creation. It was the core crystal of his Secret.

He was able to conceal the change from himself until the very moment
arrived, in its usual form of two firm taps on his shoulder as he lay in
bed with his back to Ivy. He immediately, and with conscious decision,
shook his head. The gesture in darkness was invisible, but conveyed
itself quite clearly through the bed; Ivy’s response was to stop
breathing for a time. When she resumed, the sniffs which punctuated it
were no more frequent, but they were much fuller in body, the oboe (as
it were) replacing the clarinet.

This departure from routine was demoralizing in the extreme, and brought
to Lulu his first dim awareness that the future was going to be quite
different from the past. A miserable hour or two later he made the
further distressing discovery that he missed tormentingly that which he
had just refused, such being the tyranny of the habitual.

_You, too?_ he demanded wistfully of his body as he had for two days of
his mind. _Can’t you understand that it’s all changed now?_ Somehow his
body couldn’t. He lay rigid and miserable until the window-sashes showed
darker than the panes, and then got up and dressed and went to work.
Ivy, who frequently showed signs of life when he got up in the morning,
now lay with her eyes closed, too still to be asleep.

As might have been expected, Wednesday was a quiet day containing a
stretch of hell. As quitting time approached, a couple of orderlies
started horsing around in the employees’ locker room which adjoined
Lulu’s office. Custom demanded that they have but one thing on their
minds and three ways of getting rid of it—through comedy, insult, and
loud-mouthed boasting. The location of their lockers—diagonally across
from each other in the big room—made them fire their expletives at the
tops of their voices. The position of the main exit set their course
inevitably past the back of Lulu’s chair.

They boiled out of the locker room into the office. Lulu didn’t turn to
look at them, even when one said, “Do you know what we ought to do some
payday? We ought to take old Llewellyn out an’ get his ashes hauled.”

“He wouldn’t know what to look for unless you dressed it up to look like
a ledger book.”

“Maybe he fool you. Maybe he set so quiet around here ’cause he keepin’
all he can handle around home.”

Lulu did not move, and his stillness seemed to force the orderlies’
attention on him. One wisecrack, one grin over his shoulder, and they
would have moved away. But he had no wisecrack and he didn’t know how to
make a grin. He could only sit still with his back to them.

“Nah. I’ll tell you somethin’. He just ain’t alive. Man don’t chase a
little ain’t really livin’.”

The uproarious laugh. Apparently the heartiness of their mirth was a
good substitute for the missing reaction from Lulu, for they turned
abruptly and moved to the exit.

Suddenly Lulu got to his feet excitedly. “I know what I’ll do. I’ll go
out and pick up some actress,” he told himself. And suddenly felt fine.
He felt better than he had at any time since the night when he had first
seen the marriage certificate. He couldn’t explain why the idea had come
so abruptly into his head—only that it had.

I’ll pick up this actress, he told his image in the washroom mirror five
minutes later. The image nodded encouragingly back at him. No matter
what happens then, I’ll have it to tell. Maybe I’ll tell them and maybe
I won’t. Maybe it’ll be all about how she steals my wallet and my watch,
and that’s funny. Or maybe it’ll be about how she can’t get enough of
me, how she gives me her money and sells her ring.

I won’t tell them a thing, he decided firmly as he left the hospital.
I’ll make it happen, that’s all. They don’t have to know. I’ll know.

Halfway home he said to himself, I don’t even have a wallet. I’ll have
to buy one first.

On the steps at home he added, a watch too.

Considerably sobered, he let himself into the apartment, hung up his
jacket, and got the potatoes and the knife and a pan of water and a
paper bag for the peels, and stood in front of the counter in the
kitchenette.

How much money is a wallet and a watch …

He didn’t know. It would have to be a whole lot, because he’d have to
have money for the actress too.

He put down the potato he was peeling and pulled on his lower lip. There
was one thing he could do—he could quit going to the movies on
Saturdays.

“That’s a lot of Saturdays,” he murmured.

The idea of holding on to his own pay envelope simply did not occur to
him; anyway, when he thought about money he thought about Ivy. In fact,
it took him quite a while to dispose of the very direct idea of getting
the money from her simply by asking for it. He decided against that very
direct solution only because he didn’t think she’d have any. He just
couldn’t erase from his mind the picture he had of her paying out money
every month for electricity and gas and other household expenses.

The amount of money that could be accumulated by two people with steady
jobs and a medium-low standard of living over nineteen uninterrupted
years of employment, was completely beyond his comprehension. When he
began to search her writing desk it was only with some vague
recollection of one of his painful overheard anecdotes at the
hospital—something about a boy who was eighty cents short rummaging in
his mother’s purse and finding forty dollars. “Lift it from the old
lady’s shopping money,” he murmured.

Well, there wasn’t any shopping money. There wasn’t a thing in Ivy’s
desk but painfully neat stacks of writing paper and envelopes and the
file of cancelled checks cross-indexed by number, date and alphabet—he
recalled the incomprehensible ritual each New Year’s Day when she burned
every check seven years old—little boxes of paper clips, three sizes;
rubber bands, two sizes; first and fourth class package labels; bottles
of ink, red and blue-black; forty-two thousand dollars in bonds, three
unopened boxes of pencils, and a file of correspondence. Lulu turned
away in disappointment and went back to peeling the potatoes.

He sighed and turned on the radio and went on peeling the potatoes. He
heard a commercial advertising wristwatches and paused midway in his
task to listen to it. The man said they started at only $49.95. That
didn’t sound so “only” to Lulu. That much money would amount to—uh—He
closed his eyes and moved his lips while he worked it out—about two
years and nine months worth of Saturday movies. After that he’d have to
get a wallet, and then more money—to give to the actress. He wandered
how much money you had to give actresses. Oh well. He could certainly
manage to find out in the next three years, or four—or however long it
took him.

Bulletin. Five-state alarm for two men who had only an hour before held
up a suite of offices on High Street. The robbers had made off with four
thousand in cash and negotiable bonds and twelve thousand in securities.

All that money would be enough, thought Lulu. Good heavens! Imagine
it—wanting money real bad, and going out and getting it, _just like
that_. Imagine having a story like that to tell about yourself (whether
you kept it to yourself or not.) _So I took out the gun and said all
right, let’s have them there securities_. He didn’t quite know what
securities were, but they sounded like fine things to have twelve
thousand dollars invested in. Anyone with enough spunk to do a thing
like that could make up for a good many years of sinlessness.

He wouldn’t have to wait around for years counting every penny until he
had enough money set aside to pick up an actress. (Much of Lulu’s radio
listening was in mid-afternoon, and the disruptive elements in the lives
of decent people in the serials was very frequently an actress.) Matter
of fact, if you could steal like that, you wouldn’t even need the
actress. The stealing would be sin enough. _All right, you, let’s have
those negotiable bonds_. He didn’t know what bonds were either. And he
didn’t have a gun.

Suddenly his hands stopped moving and he looked down at them and the
long curl of potato skin depending from the paring-knife, and he said
aloud, “I do so know what bonds are and I don’t even need a gun.”

At half past two on Thursday afternoon he was standing timidly at the
edge of a wide expanse of polished marble inside the First National
Bank. He no longer carried the folder next to his skin, with his
undershirt and outer shirt tucked over it. (Ivy had said, as he left,
“Lulu, I do believe you’re putting on more weight.”) He had secured one
of the hospital’s big manila envelopes and crammed the bonds into it.
The envelope was wet now where his hand grasped it. He peered all around
and just didn’t know what to do.

A man in a policeman’s uniform—but grey instead of blue—crossed over to
where Lulu was standing. He had a gun. “Can I help you, sir?” he asked.

Lulu swallowed heavily and tried to say, “I got some bonds.” But no
sound came out. He coughed and tried again.

“You want to talk to somebody about some securities,” the guard almost
miraculously divined.

Lulu managed to nod. The guard smiled and said, “All right, sir. Just
step this way.”

Lulu followed the guard to a low shiny wall with a mahogany gate that
swung open both ways. Beyond the gate was an area containing a
half-dozen desks and a half-dozen chairs, all very far apart like small
islands in a big river. The guard pointed at one of the chairs beside
one of the desks.

“Just sit down there, sir. Mr. Skerry will take care of you in a
moment.”

The guard turned away.

Lulu sidled through the gate, wondering with mounting alarm what “take
care of” might lead to, and sat down on the edge of the chair with the
envelope on his lap. The man behind the desk was huge. He had snow-white
hair and ice-blue eyes and nobody in the world could have had a collar
that clean. He finished doing something with a ruled card on the desk
and then hit the card hard with a rubber stamp. Then he looked at Lulu,
who shrank under the impact of a truly frightening smile. The man asked,
“What can I do for you?”

“Uh,” said Lulu. He dropped his eyes, saw the envelope, and remembered
the bonds. He gave the envelope to the oversized Mr. Skerry.

Mr. Skerry looked at him almost accusingly before he took out the bonds,
and after he took out the bonds, and a third time after he had riffled
through the stack, and that final scrutiny was the worst. He said, “What
are these?”

“Well,” said Lulu. “Bonds.”

“Hmm, I see.”

Mr. Skerry took a glass-case out of his waistcoat and opened it with a
snap and took out a pair of glasses and put them on. They hung to his
face by biting the bridge of his nose with little gold lips. Lulu was
fascinated. Mr. Skerry bent his iceberg of a head and looked at Lulu
between the tops of the lenses and a frown. “Are these bonds yours?”

“Oh yes,” said Lulu.

“Hmph,” said Mr. Skerry to the bonds. He lifted them a little and let
them fall to the desk and looked at the stack again.

“What I wanted,” said Lulu timidly, “is the money.”

“Oh?” said Mr. Skerry.

The phrase from the radio bulletin came to Lulu, and he pointed his
finger. “They’re _negotiable_ bonds,” he said, his voice quavering a
little.

“Oh yes, they certainly are, Mr. Er-ump.”

“Llewellyn,” Lulu supplied.

“Llewellyn. Of course, naturally. Excuse me.” Mr. Skerry picked up a
yellow sheet with some very black typing on it, made three quick motions
with his finger on the telephone dial, and said into the instrument,
“I’ve got BW listing No. three seventy-eight. Is that the latest? You’re
sure, now? Very well.” He hung up, and studied the yellow sheet, and
then put it down beside the bonds and began methodically to go through
them, comparing numbers on the bonds with numbers on the list. “Well,”
he said after a while, “that part’s all right, anyway.”

He picked up the yellow sheet again and waved it at Lulu and smiled.
Over the smile his eyes were precision-aimed—as ready as a pair of steel
drills. “This is the latest list of stolen bonds,” he said. “We always
know.”

He then did nothing for a moment but watch Lulu’s face. Lulu’s face
remained utterly expressionless, because Lulu had gone utterly numb.

“Now then, you want to liquidate all of these bonds, Mr. Llewellyn? I
see. Well, I’m afraid it will take a while. If you’d be kind enough to
wait over there …” Lulu looked up at the big clock on the wall in panic.
It was a minute or so of the bank’s closing time. A brassy clang had
started echoes all up and down the vast marble interior, and when he
glanced towards the big door where he had came in he saw that the brass
gates had been closed. The guard was herding people out a smaller door
at the side of the building.

“Oh dear, I can’t. I can’t,” he gasped. “I’ve got to get the potatoes
on!”

“Miss Fisher,” said Mr. Skerry flatly.

Startled, Lulu said, “What?”

But before he could make a more disastrous blunder a homely ageless fat
girl with thick glasses appeared at the other end of the desk and said,
“Yes, sir?”

“Take these bonds and list the numbers on a receipt for Mr. Llewellyn
here,” said Mr. Skerry. “Mr. Llewellyn, can you come back tomorrow at
about this time? We’ll have everything taken care of by then.” He added
quickly, as if to override a protest (which Lulu would not have dared to
interpose) “Not today, not today. There just isn’t time. These things
take a while, you understand? Miss Fisher, get his address. You can wait
over there,” he said to Lulu and pointed with his frown.

Lulu went ‘over there,’ which was a long leather bench against the
opposite wall. Near it was a much smaller desk than Mr. Skerry’s, where
Miss Fisher sat enthroned. In front of her was an electric typewriter.
She had the bonds at her elbow and was turning them over one by one with
her left hand while her right danced frantically and apparently
unnoticed on the top rows of keys.

Lulu watched her with awe. She had a flexible bulbous nose almost
exactly like Ivy’s, and he felt comforted. The tip of Miss Fisher’s nose
was the only remotely familiar thing in this cold busy place.

Much sooner than he would have thought possible, she was finished. She
took down his name and home address and work address and asked him if he
had a car registration—which gratified him—or any identification at all.
He showed her his pay signature card, and she seemed satisfied. Then the
guard with the grey uniform let him out the small door, and he hurried
home to peel the potatoes.

It took Mr. Skerry just three phone calls and forty minutes of his
costly time to discover the identity of the bonds’ rightful owner.
Shortly after that Ivy Shoots sat in the chair at the end of his desk.
He had to tell her three times in a row and then show her the bonds
before she could believe her ears.

Lulu got up and dressed as quietly as he could. Maybe the difference was
all in him, but Ivy had seemed painfully quiet all evening and he didn’t
like it and he wanted to get out of the apartment before he had to talk
to her. But he got only as far as the bedroom door when her voice
brought him up short.

“Lulu.”

Slowly he turned back. He said, “I’m late already. It’s half past …”

“That’s all right. I want to talk to you.” She turned on the lamp on the
night table. “Lulu, anything to do with money, you ought to ask me
first.”

He didn’t say anything. He found that he felt no fear, but only a fierce
secret happiness. The money wasn’t important, getting caught wasn’t
important. The important thing was stealing the bonds, and she couldn’t
change that. He hoped she would hurry up and get through accusing him,
because he wanted to be at his cage at the hospital. He wanted to hear
the people all around him talking, and be able to say silently, how long
has it been since you stole three and a half pounds of negotiable bonds?

“It was really too silly of you. You just don’t understand these things,
Lulu. Do you know you came _that_ close”—she showed him how close with a
thumb and forefinger—“to getting arrested for _stealing_ those bonds?”

Lulu made no reply, offered no defense. He simply poked out his lower
lip and looked at his shoes. He didn’t know what to say.

“You told yourself I was keeping all that money for myself, didn’t you?”
she said. “Isn’t that what you thought?”

He remained silent.

“Oh dear, I suppose I can’t blame you. I just never dreamed you’d
misunderstand and you never said anything. It seemed the best way.
You’ve got to believe me, Lulu! You do believe me?” She looked at him
and sniffed unhappily, and blew her nose. “No—I guess you don’t.
Wait—I’ll prove it.”

He looked at her, and what she read in his face he had no way of
knowing. But she scrabbled at her throat so roughly and suddenly that
she tore off one of her shoulder-straps. She pulled out the key to the
steel box by its ribbon, and put it in the keyhole and opened the box,
and took out the top paper without looking at what she was doing and
gave it to him.

“You take this with you when you go back there this afternoon, and give
it to Mr. Skerry. He’s a nice man, and he’ll take care of everything.”

Lulu looked down at the paper, and then quickly back at her. “It’s
called an assignment form. It signs over most of the bonds to you, Lulu.
They’re yours. Don’t you understand? I worked it out to the penny—how
much I’ve made, how much you’ve made, and all the expenses we shared.
That’s your money, Lulu. Only you’ve got to believe I wanted you to have
it all along.”

He looked at the assignment form, and slowly put it away in his breast
pocket with the receipt that Miss Fisher had given him at the bank.

“You could have gone to jail, Lulu, you silly. For stealing your own
money. Imagine you—_stealing!_”

He looked at her and at the black box. Suddenly he began to tremble.
Something about him made Ivy pick up the bed-clothes and clutch them to
her breast. “Lulu!”

He whirled and ran out. He was panting even before he began to run. He
pursed up his lips painfully and his cheeks went round and flat, round
and flat, like a little plump bellows. His eyes began to water and his
throat hurt him.

He hadn’t stolen anything. He felt cheated, betrayed, lost.

And Mr. Skerry was nicer to him on Friday afternoon than anyone had ever
been since his aunts died. He told Lulu that he now possessed a very
respectable sum of money which he’d do well to—direct quote—“let that
fine woman take care of for you.” When he got no reaction from Lulu—who
had gone numb again—he sighed and helped him deposit most of the money
in a savings account and some of it in a checking account.

He even showed him how to make out a check and keep up the stubs. He
really took a lot of trouble over Lulu, who absorbed perhaps a fifth of
what he was saying and ultimately escaped into the sunlight again.

He found Friday’s shopping list and blindly went through the routine of
marketing and getting home, the stairs, the key, the putting away of the
groceries. Then he went into the living room and sat, or collapsed, into
his chair in the corner by the radio.

He was confused and despairing, lost especially in the once
securely-blueprinted stretches of the future. More than anything else,
he wanted back what he had lost—this apartment, this routine, Ivy’s
protective handling of everything. His hand strayed to the radio dial
but he could not switch it on because of the envelope which was propped
against it. The envelope had his name on it in Ivy’s quick accurate
handwriting. Wondering, he tore it open and unfolded the sheet of letter
paper within and squared himself away to read the communication through.
He read every word in quick succession without grasping the letter’s
meaning at all. He was just getting the feel of the words the first time
around. Then he started over, reading each sentence slowly for the
meaning alone.

_Dear Lulu:_

_I am going away right from work today instead of tomorrow morning. So
don’t do so many potatoes and be sure to put my half of the liver in the
freezer part_.

_I am going away early this week because I want to think about things.
What happened about the bonds opened my eyes a whole lot, and I have to
look around with my eyes open. You must believe me when I say I never
meant to keep the savings away from you. You have got to believe me.
Please. It’s just that in arranging everything to suit myself I never
thought you might feel hurt and not understand. It was all done to make
everything simple for you but now I want to arrange everything to make
it fair. I am very sorry Lulu. Don’t worry if what I’m saying doesn’t
make sense right now. It will later. You’ll see_.

_Lulu please, please don’t do anything silly. Don’t go away and leave me
whatever you do. You don’t know how to take care of yourself. If you
want to go later, well, all right. But give me a chance to teach you how
to do for yourself. I am so afraid you will get yourself into some awful
trouble_.

_Lulu you are a good person, a very good person who could not do a bad
thing if you tried. I don’t like myself very much just now, and I am not
surprised if you don’t either. I want to help you and do some things
over I have done wrong. So please don’t go away. I’ll be worried sick.
Believe me about the bonds, it’s the truth. Now you have your share you
can believe me, can’t you? Only just don’t go away anywhere_.

_Ivy_

The last paragraph contained several crooked lines and words crossed out
here and there and squinched up so that reading them took time. Lulu
read the last part four times, and then he drew down the paper and
glared at the radio. “I am not!” he barked in the same furious voice
with which he had frightened Ivy by accident once.

 … _a very good person who could not do a bad thing if you tried_. “I am
_not!_” he shouted for the second time. He stamped across the room and
back again, and what he felt uncurling somewhere in the region of his
solar plexus was a new thing, a frightening thing. It was anger—and
nothing that he had ever experienced in his entire life up to that
instant had made him feel enraged before.

He scooped up the letter and glared at it. Next to that one infuriating
statement—which he again denied out loud—the only other thing the letter
had to say to him was the desperate, pleading request that urged him not
to go away.

Leaving Ivy—leaving the only home he had—was something that would never
have crossed his mind in thirty years’ trying. But when Ivy said it, and
said it over and over, it exploded inside him. “I will so,” he told the
piece of paper solemnly. “I will so leave.”

And he did. He really did. He filled two paper shopping bags with his
clothes and left on Saturday afternoon instead of going to the movies as
he had planned. He got a furnished room right across the street from the
hospital and down the street from the bank and up the street from the
movies.

On Monday they called him in to the main office arid sat him down, in
front of a telephone with the receiver off. He picked the receiver up
and listened to it, and sure enough it was Ivy, calling him up at work
for the very first time. She sounded terrible, with her squeaky
pleading, her frequent sobbing, and another one of her head colds. He
just listened in complete silence until there was a pause, unable to
think of anything to tell her that would make even a little sense to
himself.

He finally said, “No, no, I can’t. You hear, I can’t no more.” He put
the receiver on its cradle and sat there looking at it. He found he was
trembling. He thought he ought to tell her at least that he wasn’t sick
or in any awful trouble. He picked up the phone again but it only buzzed
at him. Ivy was gone out of it. He recradled the receiver.

The hospital cashier glanced at him, and then came over. “Anything
wrong?” he asked.

Lulu stood up and wiped his upper lip with the hack of his hand. “I can
take care of myself,” he said almost belligerently.

“Why, sure you can,” said the cashier, backing off a pace. “You just
didn’t look so good, that’s all.”

“Well, I’m not going back there,” said Lulu.

“Okay, okay,” said the cashier, holding up placating hands. “I just
wanted to help.”

“No sense ever asking me no more,” said Lulu. He shambled back to the
receiving desk, leaving a very puzzled young man staring after him.

For a few weeks, getting adjusted to living alone took up so much of
Lulu’s life and thoughts that he had no time for his sins. Living in
furnished rooms and eating in restaurants are not always completely
simple matters even to the intelligent, and Lulu was a babe in. the
woods almost from the first. Keeping cash on his person was a habit he
found complicated and very difficult to acquire.

He used his checkbook constantly, for a ten-cent cup of coffee, a
sandwich, and once even for a newspaper so he could check the radio
programs. Finally the manager of the restaurant where he ate came over
to him with a sheaf of his checks and asked him plaintively to cut it
out.

“Write a big one any time, and keep the cash in your pocket and use what
you want. Okay? You got my girl spendin’ a hour and a half every week
listin’ your checks in the deposit slip.”

Lulu blushed painfully and promised to do better. To his amazement he
found that he could. He tried the same thing at the grocery, where he
had been writing a check every night for two soft rolls and six slices
of liverwurst for his lunch. He wrote a check for ten dollars, and used
the cash for a week. The proprietor was pleased and even increased the
thickness of the liverwurst slices as a token of his esteem.

He passed Ivy twice in the street. She did not speak to him, and he was
speechless even at the thought of her.

His new life wove in one unexpected thread. The second day of his
liberation he was in a booth in the restaurant, and had just finished
his soup when he became aware of someone standing next to the table. He
looked up and there was Miss Fisher from the bank.

She said timidly, “I do beg your pardon. But I thought perhaps you
wouldn’t mind if I shared this table with you. There are no other seats
in the restaurant …”

He got up hastily and made room at the little table and saw that she had
the salt and he even stacked her cafeteria tray on top of his out of the
way. When she was organized she looked at him with a wan thank-you smile
that became recognition. “Why, it’s Mr. Llewellyn!”

He didn’t say anything more to her that evening—he couldn’t. But the
next night she was there ahead of him and when he came along with his
tray, she called out to him and patted the table across from her. After
that they always had dinner together. She was quiet and nice, and she
let him be silent for as long as he wanted to be.

Six or seven weeks later something happened at the hospital that made a
deep impression on Lulu. A furious young female face appeared at his
wicket and demanded: “Where is George Hickenwaller? Where is he? I got
to see him right away.”

Lulu stared dumbly until she banged the palm of her hand on the shelf by
the wicket, and repeated the question. Her face started darkening
ominously and the blood-vessels on the sides of her neck began to stand
out in the most alarming fashion.

He remembered then. George Hickenwaller was the married orderly who had
annoyed him more than most of the others—although he wasn’t quite sure
why. “I’ll find him. Just wait a minute,” he promised. He got up, and
went over to the doorway of the locker room, and saw at once that George
Hickenwaller was in there with his back to the wall. He was making wild
signals of distress and prayer, and moving his mouth strangely, giving
vent to some exaggerated, silent, pleading syllables which Lulu could
not understand.

He went back to his wicket. “He’s in there,” he said, thumbing at the
door.

“In there, is he?” said the young woman. She turned angrily to the man
behind her. Lulu saw that the man was a policeman. “He’s in there,” she
relayed.

“In there, is he?” the policeman countered. He ran around to the front,
to the general office door, and went sprinting across behind Lulu and
into the locker room.

There came sounds of the chase and a cry for mercy, and then poor
Hickenwaller was walked abjectly out by the policeman. The big,
red-faced cop had a meaty hand on his collar and another in the back of
his belt.

Quite a crowd had gathered by this time and Lulu found himself standing
next to Hickenwaller’s friend, the other orderly. This man shook his
head sadly. “I tol’ him he wasn’t goin’ to get away with it. ‘I know
what I’m doin’,’ he says. ‘I got it made.’ ” The orderly shook his head
again. “He got it made _now_ all right, but good.”

“What did he do?” Lulu asked.

“Got married.”

“To that one?” Lulu pointed at the angry woman, who was ducking under
the policeman’s guard to punch Hickenwaller solidly on the ear.

“Yeah, an’ another one too. I tol’ him she’d find out.”

“Two wives?”

“Bigamy,” said the orderly knowledgeably.

“Is that very bad?” Lulu asked, really wanting to know.

The orderly cocked his head and squinted at him. “Lew old man, let me
tell you. _One_ is very bad.”

“Yes, but this—uh—bigamy. It’s _really_ bad, huh.”

“No way to get to heaven.”

“Well,” said Lulu, and got back to work.

Dinnertime, comfortable with Miss Fisher in the booth. He wondered why
she seemed so glad to have dinner with him all the time. What did she
get out of it. He didn’t ask her. But he continued to wonder.

“Oh, _there_ you are!” someone said at his elbow. It was the manager. He
half-filled the booth and loomed over them. “I thought I had all the
trouble with you I was goin’ to,” he growled at Lulu.

Lulu went speechless. He made himself smaller in his seat, while Miss
Fisher looked frightened at the manager and anxious at Lulu.

The manager banged a check with a bank slip stapled to it, banged it
down directly in front of Lulu. “After all that trouble, now they’re
bouncing.”

Lulu didn’t know what to say. Miss Fisher stared at him, while the
manager continued to glare. People began to crane and peer at them. Lulu
slipped down another notch in his seat.

Suddenly Miss Shelly Fisher snatched up the check, “Just a minute, Mr.
Grossman,” she said firmly, “I’m sure this can be straightened out. Mr.
Llewellyn, didn’t you make a large deposit at the First National just a
few weeks ago?”

Lulu nodded.

“Have you put any more money in the checking account since then?”

He shook his head sheepishly. “I didn’t know I had to,” he mumbled.

“Well, have you taken anything out of the savings account?”

He shook his head. Miss Fisher said, “I’ll vouch for him, Mr. Grossman.
He just isn’t used to a checking account yet. He has a good balance in
savings. You can take my word for it.”

“You work at the bank?”

“You’ve seen me there.”

He nodded slowly. “Well, all right then,” he growled. He picked up the
check and waved it in front of Lulu’s nose. “You take care of it by this
time tomorrow, you hear?”

“Of course he will. Of course,” said Miss Fisher soothingly. She put her
hand over Lulu’s as he slipped yet another inch down in his chair, which
put the table about breast-high to him. Grossman went away.

“It’s all right now,” she said. “It’s all right. Sit up, Mr. Llewellyn.”

He did, shamefaced. “I didn’t know,” he said feebly.

“You’d better let someone look over your checkbook. Do you want me to?”

“It’s home,” he said, regretfully, feeling that the simple statement had
disposed of the matter.

“I don’t mind,” she said, surprisingly. “I have nothing else to do.”

“You mean, you’d come to …”

She nodded while he fought his unwilling tongue. After a moment she got
up. “Come on,” she said.

Unbelievingly he followed her out of the restaurant, and then led the
way to his rooming house.

The room was so small he had to sit on the bed if she was going to sit
at the table. He kept it neat enough, but places that crummy are
unconquerable. He found the checkbook and gave it to her. She riffled
through the stubs, finding not a single entry.

“Well,” she said, “No _wonder!_” Very carefully she explained to him how
he must keep his record in the stubs and make an effort not to let
checks bounce. He nodded humbly every three seconds while she talked.
She did it kindly and did not laugh at him, or sneer.

“Yes, Mr. Skerry told me. I guess it didn’t stick.”

“_Lots_ of people don’t understand it at first.”

This is a very fine lady, he told himself, and wished he could say it
out loud.

“What are those?” She pointed to the top of the chest, where eleven cash
envelopes lay in a neat row.

“Oh, that’s my paydays,” he said.

She picked one of the envelopes up, pressed it, shook it, and finally
read the data typed on it. “Cash, my goodness. They pay you in cash. You
shouldn’t leave cash around.”

He could only manage to get out a faltering, “I’m sorry.”

“My, you do need someone to look after you.” She counted the envelopes.
“Don’t you see, if you put these in your checking account every week
you’d always have money to write checks against?”

He didn’t see. He just waved at the envelopes and said unhappily, “I
just never knew _what_ to do with ’em.”

He intercepted her look of astonishment and said abjectly, “I never
could understand all this. You want to help me with it?”

So Miss Fisher began taking care of Lulu Llewellyn.

He began to be happier. Yet his relationship with Miss Fisher was so
innocent, and she herself so different from any woman he’d ever met that
some of his old torment began to return, and he found himself cringing
again under the assault of other people’s sins. Now, however, as his
philosophy of sin began a slow evolution, there was a slightly different
reaction. Instead of considering himself totally unfit and excluded, he
began to match what he knew of himself against each of the sins he heard
recounted. Could I do _that?_ Could he ever gamble? Seduce? Steal,
swear, assault, outwit? Always no and no and no, and the words in Ivy’s
letter trailing across his clear conscience: _a very good man who
couldn’t do a bad thing if he tried_.

And then one day he saw the face of Hickenwaller’s friend go past his
wicket—just that, a reminder. And belatedly, as all things did, the
solution came to Lulu Llewellyn.

He went to Miss Fisher and asked her, and she cried. Then she said yes,
she would marry him. Then she cried again and said pathetically that she
had made up her mind when she was eight years old that nobody would ever
want her and she might as well face it.

So they went down to City Hall and got a license, and three days later
they were married. He chittered and jittered like the most eager of
grooms. He was eager about something else than that which plagues most
grooms, however, and it was more important—to him, at least.

That very evening he marched to Ivy’s apartment and up the one flight of
stairs. It made him feel a little strange to be knocking on the door
instead of using his key, but somehow he felt that he should knock, that
he owed her that courtesy. He waited happily, feeling the crackling
comfort of the marriage license in his breast pocket.

The door opened.

“Lulu! Oh—Lulu, I’m so glad.” She looked worn, sallow-cheeked, but her
eyes were shining. She pulled him inside and shut the dear. “I just knew
you’d come back. I just knew you would, you had to.”

He cleared his throat. “I …”

“Don’t talk. Don’t say anything. I’ve had a chance to think things out
clearly. And oh, Lulu, it’s all so senseless and I’m so sorry.”

“But I didn’t …”

“Don’t say another word. You’re going to listen to me now. I’ve waited
too long. You just stay right there where you belong.”

Half playfully but very firmly she nudged him over to his old chair and
crowded him until he had to sit down.

“I won’t be a second,” she said, and ran out of the room. He sat there,
his backsides liking the old chair, and thought excitedly. You’re the
first. Miss Fisher—she’s the second. He wondered how that would sound if
he ever told it at the hospital. He put the speculation aside to think
about later.

After a moment she came out of the bedroom carrying the black metal box.
“I’m not a stupid woman, Lulu,” she said. “Really I’m not. I read and I
think and I can keep my end up when I talk with well-educated people.
But sometimes the brightest of us can be more stupid than the slowest
witted. Well, anyway, I’ll admit it. I finally had to talk it out with
someone. I did, Lulu—and I got the answer.” She inserted the key in the
box, turned it, raised the black metal lid. “He’s a dear man, a
brilliant man. He’s a psychiatrist. I told him everything, but you
mustn’t worry about that, Lulu. They’re like _priests_. Anyway, I didn’t
even tell him your name.”

She rummaged in the box and found a paper and began to gesture with it
while she talked.

“There it was, right in front of my silly old eyes, and I never even saw
it. He explained to me that it was _terribly_ important to you to thank
we were living together _without_ being married. He said it made a man
of you. He said you had been very strictly brought up and that you
had—well, he called it a ‘black-and-white’ morality. He said you took it
so seriously when you were a child that you had nothing at all on the
black side—not so much as cheating on a school examination, or hitting a
puppy in your whole life. That’s why, he said, when I finally told you
that our living together was a ‘white’ thing, and had been from the
beginning, it was a terrible blow to your self-confidence. You just
couldn’t stand it.”

“Now I’m going to tell you something I never thought I’d ever tell to a
living soul. I was on my own when I was fourteen, and I always had to
think things out for myself. Sometimes I did well at that, and sometimes
I failed. But I always thought things out for myself first—not for laws
or anyone else or customs or anything like that, but just for myself
alone. Well, never mind all that now. One of the main things was—I
thought I had to have freedom. I made up my mind I’d do what I wanted
with whom I wanted, just as long as I was discreet. As long as I put a
partition that was like a high wall between the one thing and the other.
You don’t understand this, do you? Well, that’s all right, You’ll
understand all you need to in just one more minute.”

“Didn’t you ever wonder what I did with my weekends for nineteen years,
Lulu? Didn’t you _care?_”

He started to answer, but she gave him no chance. “No; I don’t suppose
it ever occurred to you to wonder. It was just the way things were—like
water running downhill and the sun coming up. You knew I was going to be
away Saturday and Sunday, and you just accepted it. Poor Lulu! Well. I
see I’ve get to tell you then. I was taking a course in economics for a
while. Let me see that would be about six years ago. Oh, I’ve done all
sorts of things on weekends—and anyway, there was this man. You see, and
I don’t know what happened to me at all, but I’d never felt like that in
my life before. And I guess I never will again,” she added in a whisper,
tragically.

Then she blew her nose. “I have the most awful cold, Lulu. I think I’m a
bit feverish. So there I was, feeling like that about this man, you see,
and for a while I thought he might feel the same way about me. So I saw
a lawyer and showed him my papers, and I got this. Here, Lulu, this is
yours. This is for you.” She handed him the paper.

The whole episode was so reminiscent of the one which had blasted his
quiet life once before that he took the paper without even glancing at
it. He simply closed his eyes, and got up and stood trembling, waiting
for he knew not what.

She understood and laughed happily. Then she coughed, and laughed again
and took the paper away from him. “You’re afraid of it, and I don’t
blame you. Here, I’ll read it to you.” Her hand touched his, and he felt
the paper slip out of his fingers.

“ ‘There came before me in the County Court in the township of …’ Oh,
let’s skip all that lawyers’ talk. Here it is. ‘Therefore by weight of
evidence in camera’—that means secret and confidential—‘the marriage of
said L. Llewellyn and said Ivy Shoots is hereby annulled and held to be
void and without existence.’ ”

She pushed the paper triumphantly back into his lap. “You understand
that, Lulu? It isn’t a divorce. A divorce says a marriage was and is no
more. This says that in the eyes of the law and in my eyes, Lulu, and in
your eyes, Lulu, the wedding never took place. You see? You see? So if
that was what was bothering you, it needn’t any longer. It’s gone. We’re
without benefit of clergy if that’s how you’d like it to be. We can call
it common-law if you want that instead. Lulu I just don’t know—?”

He lay in a pressing welter of thoughts and scraps of thoughts. The one
which came swirling to the top first had to do with the nature of the
certificate in a modern culture. The thought wasn’t quite that lucid in
him, of course. He saw the blasting of his painless existence by a piece
of paper. He saw people breaking the law and being broken by it—a piece
of paper for each. A piece of paper for everything you did or didn’t do,
even the things which were truly and really done, just by changing the
paper.

“Lulu,” she whispered, “If you should want to—you can even m-marry
someone else. You’re free to do that, to hurt me that much if …” And
then she began to cough. The wracking, all-too-familiar quality of the
cough made him shift uneasily in his chair, and over his heart his new
marriage license crackled gently.

Somewhere deep within him stirred the bitter, despairing thought that he
was going to have to pick up an actress after all. Pick one up and marry
her—or he would never be a bigamist. He put his knuckles slowly up to
his forehead and closed his eyes. He stood like that for a long time
while his lips tried futilely to shape words. Finally a half-sentence
came. “Think about,” he said. He went to the door. “Think about it,
I’ll … think about it.”

“Come back … soon,” she said. “It’s not—good here now, Lulu. I didn’t
know what I—well, come back soon.” She did not accompany him to the
door. He knew she was going to cough, or cry, or let go again in some
even more distressing way. He got out quickly.

Lulu went upstairs to the pharmacy and said, “Joe, I don’t sleep so
good.”

Joe said, “How long you want to sleep?”

“Just once, twelve hours. Like a cold shower couldn’t wake me up.”

“Can do, Lew. Take two of …”

“That’s the trouble, Joe. Pills choke me up. You got powder that don’t
taste so bad?”

“I got better’n that. I got a liquid don’t taste at all. Only, Lew,
don’t talk it around, right?”

“Me? Joe, I wouldn’t do that.”

“That’s good. That’s fine, Lew.”

An hour later Lulu said, “Drink your milk.”

Obediently, Shelly Fisher Llewellyn drank her milk. She was quite
unhappy for a four-week bride. For the time being she was trying to
escape from her unhappiness by doing everything she could think of that
might please her husband. Lulu got up and stretched. “I don’t know what
you’re going to do, but I’m going to turn in,” he said. “Don’t come now
if you don’t want to. Good night.”

“Oh,” she said, “I’ll come.”

He embraced her while she fell asleep. He said, “I’m going to hold you
just like this all night long.”

Just after two in the morning he silently mounted the steps at Ivy’s
place and let himself in with his key. She never had asked him for the
key and never would. The chain lock wasn’t on either.

He was wearing gloves and sneakers. It was dark inside and he was as
quiet as all the rest of it. He knew where it creaked and where it
bumped. He drifted through the place and into the bedroom like a
searching of wind.

She was peacefully in bed on her back, her lips slightly parted.

He couldn’t really see her, but he could sense her there, lying very,
very still.

He got the second pillow, _his_ pillow, from the bed, just the way he
had thought about it. She wasn’t touching it with her cheek or left
hand, and she didn’t stir when he lifted it away. Very carefully he
tucked the end of the pillow under his chin, so that it hung down over
the front of his chest like a bib. Then he fell across the bed with the
pillow over her face and leaned his whole weight on it, with both hands
pulling upwards on the bed rail. Far a couple of seconds it was as if
the woman and the bed and even the floor were fighting hack, but it
passed quickly. He clung there, heavy on her, for a long time, till he
was sure.

Panting, he rose and stood and held his breath and listened. The whole
world was asleep.

It’s done, he said silently. She always had an answer in her black box,
she always made me lose. But I fooled her. Now I’ve done the biggest one
of all.

The box. There it was. He crossed to it and tried the lid, feeling sure
it would be locked. To his surprise, it wasn’t.

He opened it. There was only one paper in it.

He began to tremble. If she’d had one paper she’d kept away from him, he
told himself, it was a paper he didn’t want to see. He took it in the
dark and carried it to the bathroom and tore it into fragments and
flushed it away.

Then he left—not by the front door, but by the fire escape. He left the
bedroom window open and the lower section of the fire escape
lowered—swung down and held by a tilted ash can.

When he got back to his room he undressed quickly, silently, and climbed
into bed. He was exalted, beside himself, a giant. Shelly said in the
morning, very shyly, “Quite a man, aren’t you?”

The detective sergeant had an old face and brand new eyes. He came to
Lulu’s window at the hospital and peered through the bars and said,
“You’re Llewellyn?”

Lulu said: “That’s my name.”

“Where were you at last night?” the detective asked.

“Home; asleep.”

“Well, that’s all right. We checked already. You got an ex-wife who
called herself Ivy Shoots?”

Whatever showed on Lulu’s face must have looked all right to the
detective, for he paused for only an instant before he said: “Well,
she’s dead.”

_I killed her_, said Lulu. But to his own amazement he didn’t say it
aloud. He wanted to, but somehow he couldn’t. He couldn’t say anything.

“Don’t take it so hard,” said the detective. “We all got to go some
time. What I want to know is—you goin’ to plant her? The doctor, he
didn’t know who to notify, so he called us. We had to go through her
stuff, and that’s how we found your address. She didn’t have much, but
she left it all to you.”

“Oh.”

“You better get right down there, and check up. Somebody broke in there
last night. Only thing we can find is missing is her death certificate.
The doc says he wrote one and stuck it in a lockbox beside the bed. But
we found only the box.”

“Death certificate?” Lulu whispered.

“Yeah, there she lays stiff as a plank, dead of pneumonia. And somebody
comes in and puts a pillow over her face and swipes the exit ticket.
Must’ve took it in the dark, thinking it was worth something. Joke on
him. But you better get down there and check.”

“I killed her,” said Llewellyn. “I did, I killed her.”

“Cut it out,” said the detective.

“Well. I did,” said Lulu.

‘There’s a nice legal duplicate piece of paper says you didn’t,” said
the detective, and drove Lulu down to the apartment, where there were
lots of people to tell him all the things he had to do. He did them and
he died.

He’s still working at the hospital behind his little iron grating, and
he takes the laundry out on Mondays and the cleaning on Tuesdays and
picks them all up on Fridays, and he has the potatoes on by the time his
missus gets home from work every day. But he’s dead all right.



IT OPENS THE SKY


Opportunity knocked again, this time right on the eyeball, making him
blink.

Deeming had stopped at a crosswalk—he lived in one of the few parts of
town where streets still crossed on the same level and was waiting for
the light to change, when on the post by his head, right at eye level, a
hand appeared. It wore a thin gold band and a watch. It was the watch
that made him blink. He’d seen only one like it in his life before, a
beautifully made little thing with slender carved-ruby numerals and,
instead of hands, the ability to make its rubies glow one at a time for
the hours, and a ruddy-amber pip of light float mysteriously at the
right minute. It was geomagnetically powered and wouldn’t wear out or
run down for a thousand years. It came from some place in the Crab
Nebulae, where the smallest intelligent life form yet known to man did a
brisk trade in precision engineering.

Deeming tore his gaze away from the watch and followed its wrist and arm
down to its owner. Deeming was not especially fond of animals, but he
categorized his women with a zoological code. They were chicks, fillies,
bunnies, and dogs, in descending order of appeal.

This one was a goat.

She looked as if she had packed sixty years of living into thirty-five
plus. She had half a bag on already, though it was still early in the
evening, which accounted for her holding the pole up while she waited
with him for the light to change. She had not noticed him, which was
fine, and he acted just as abstracted as she was.

I’ll give it two hours, he thought, and then, as she sagged slightly and
caught her balance too quickly and too much, as befits any drunk passing
through dignity on the way to sloppiness, he made it ninety minutes.
That watch is mine in ninety minutes. Bet?

The light changed and he strode out ahead of her. Just past the corner
he stopped to look in a display window and see her reflection as she
approached, stiff but listing a bit to port. He let her pass him and
then to his delight saw her step into a cocktail bar. He went the other
way, rounded the corner, entered a restaurant, and went straight back to
the men’s room. He had it to himself for the moment, and a moment was
all he needed. Off came the stiff, clipped moustache; out came the
golden-brown contact lenses, so that now his eyes were blue. He combed
the parting out of his flat black hair and set up waves. Half-inch
inserts came out of his side pockets and were slipped into his heels, to
change his gait and increase his already considerable height. He took
off his jacket and turned it inside out, so that he was no longer drab
and monochrome, as befitted Mr. Deeming, second assistant to the
assistant desk man at the Rotoril Hotel, but sport-jacketed and cocky
the way Jimmy the Flick ought to be. Jimmy the Flick always emerged and
disappeared in men’s rooms, not only because of their privacy, but
because that was the one place you could count on not to see one of
those damned Angels, who didn’t eat, either.

Deeming was pleasantly certain, as he left the place, that no one had
noticed him going in or Jimmy coming out. He went around the corner and
into the cocktail joint.

Deeming sat on the edge of his bed, feeling glum. He tossed the watch up
in the air and caught it.

It hadn’t been ninety minutes after all—it had taken him nearly two and
a half hours. He hadn’t planned on her caring quite that much for the
watch. She wouldn’t take it off for him to admire and wouldn’t agree
that it was out of kilter and he could adjust it in just a second, so he
had to use the old midnight-swim gimmick. He’d got her into the car all
right, without her seeing the number plate, and he’d done a good clean
job of parking by the river where it wouldn’t be noticed. It was hard to
judge how drunk she was. When she talked about her husband—the watch was
all that she had of her husband’s any more—she sobered up altogether too
much, and it took a lot of oil and easy chatter to get her off the
subject. But anyway he’d got the clothes off her and at last the watch,
down there by the river, and then had managed to scoop up the lot and
sprint back to the car before she could bleat, “Oh, Jimmy—Jimmy, you
can’t!” more than twice. He didn’t know how she’d get back to town and
it didn’t worry him. He found six and a half in her pouch, and an I.D.
card. He pocketed the money—it about covered the price of her drinks—and
incinerated the rest of her stuff with the clothes. A good clean job,
carrying the special virtue of being totally unlike anything he had ever
done before; if there was anything in the cosmos that would bring a
swarm of Angels down on a citizen, it was the habitual crime habitually
performed. He should be proud.

He was, too, but he was also glum, and this irritated him. Both the
glumness and the irritation were familiar feelings with him, and he
could not for the life of him figure out why he always felt this way
after a job. He had so much to be glad about. He was big and handsome
and smart as an Angel—he might even say smarter; he’d been doing this
for years now and they’d never come close to picking him up. Damn
zombies. Some said they were robots. Some said supermen. People touched
their cloaks for luck, or to help a sick child get better. They didn’t
eat. They didn’t sleep. They carried no weapons. Just went around
smiling and being helpful and reminding people to be kind to one
another. There used to be police and soldiery, according to the books.
Not any more. Not with the Angels popping up whenever they weren’t
wanted by the people concerned, with their sanctimony and their
bullet-proof hides.

Sure, Deeming thought, I’m smarter than an Angel. What’s an Angel
anyway? Somebody with rules to abide by. (I’ve got a little more elbow
room than that.) Somebody who is remarkable to begin with and makes
himself more so with magic tricks and golden cloaks and all that jazz.
(I’m an invisible clerk at a low-level fleabag, or a disappearing
cockerel with a line like lightning and sticky fingers—whichever I
want.)

He tossed the watch and caught it and looked at it and felt glum. He
always felt glum when he succeeded, and he always succeeded. He never
tried anything where he wouldn’t succeed.

Maybe that’s the trouble, he thought, falling back on the bed and
looking up at the ceiling. I got all this stuff and never use but a
fraction of it.

Never thought of it like that before.

I break all the rules but I do it by playing safe. I play it safer than
a civil servant buying trip insurance for a ride on a bus. I walk under
a closed sky, he thought, like a bug under a rock. Course, I put the
tight lid on myself, which is better than having a lid put on, even a
large lid, by society or religion. But even so … my sky is closed. What
I need, I need _reach_, that’s what.

Or maybe, he thought, sitting up to glower at the watch in his hand,
maybe I need a pay-off that’s worth what brains and speed I put into it.
How long have I been working respectably for peanuts and robbing
carefully for—well, no more’n an occasional walnut?

Which reminds me, I better get this thing fenced out before that
spaceman’s relict finds herself a fig leaf and somebody with a whistle
to blow.

He got up, slowly shaking his head in disgust and wishing that one
time—just one lousy time—he could make a touch and feel as good as he
had a right to feel.

He put out a hand to the door and it knocked at him.

Now, you see? he told himself out of the same sort of disgust, you see?
Anybody else would freeze now, turn pale, start to sweat, throw the
watch into the reclaimer, run up the wall like a rat in a box. But look
at you, standing absolutely still thinking three times as fast as a
Class Eight computer, checking everything, including all the things you
have already done to handle just this situation—the moustache back on,
the brown eyes again, the shorter stature again, the heel pads hidden in
the reversible jacket and the jacket hidden in the secret panel behind
the closet.

“Who is it?”

 … And your voice steady and your pulse firm—yes, Deeming’s voice and
the pulse of innocence, not the jaunty Jimmy’s tone or his rutty
heartbeat. So what’s to feel glum about, boy? What’s the matter with
you, to dislike yourself and every situation you get into, purely
because you know before you start that you’ll handle it so well?

“May I see you for a moment, Mr. Deeming?”

He didn’t recognize the voice. That was good, or it was bad, depending.
If good, why worry? And why worry if it was bad?

He dropped the watch into his side pocket and opened the door.

“I hope I’m not bothering you,” said the pudgy man who stood there.

“Come in,” Deeming left the door open and turned his back. “Sit down.”
He laughed the minor assistant’s timid little laugh. “I hope you’re
selling something. I wouldn’t be able to buy it but it’s nice to have
somebody to talk to for a change.”

He heard the door close carefully. The pudgy man did not sit down and he
did not laugh. Deeming did not care for the silence so he turned to look
at the man, which was apparently what the man was waiting for. “You can
have somebody to talk to,” he said quietly. “You can talk to Richard E.
Rockhard.”

“Great,” said Deeming. “Who might Richard E. Rockhard be?”

“You haven’t … well, that isn’t really surprising. When they’re big,
everybody knows them. When they’re hiring and firing the big ones, they
tend to be almost as quiet as assistant clerks, Mr. Deeming … You know
Antares Trading? And the Lunar and Outer Orbit Lines? And Galactic
Mines?”

“You mean this Rockhard is—”

“In part, Mr. Deeming. In part.”

Jimmy the Flick would have bugged his eyes and made a low whistle.
Deeming put his fingertips together and whispered, “Oh, my goodness.”

“Well?” said the man, after waiting for something more and not getting
it. “Will you come and see him?”

“You mean, Mr. Rockhard? You mean—me? You mean—now?”

“I mean all those things.”

“Why does he … what—well, why me?” asked Deeming, with becoming modesty.

“He needs your help.”

“Oh, my goodness. I don’t know what I could possibly do to help a man
like … well, can you tell me what it’s about?”

“No,” said the man.

“No?”

“No, except that it’s urgent, it’s big, and it will be more worth your
while than anything you have ever done in your life.”

“Oh, my goodness,” said Deeming again. ‘What you’d better do is go find
an Angel. They help people. I can’t—”

“You can do things an Angel couldn’t do, Mr. Deeming.”

Deeming affected a laugh. It said a thousand words about the place and
function of the Little Men of the world.

“Mr. Rockhard thinks you can, Mr. Deeming. Mr. Rockhard knows you can.”

“He knows … about _me?_”

“Everything,” said the pudgy man, absolutely without inflection.

Deeming had a vague swift wish that he had atomized the watch after all.
It seemed to be as big and as spillable and as hot as a bowl of soup
wedged into his side pocket. “Better get an Angel,” he suggested again.

The man glanced at the door and then took a step closer. He dropped his
voice and said earnestly, “I assure you, Mr. Deeming, Mr. Rockhard will
not and cannot do that in this matter.”

“It sounds like something I’d better not do,” said Deeming grimly.

The man shrugged. “Very well. If you don’t want it, you don’t want it.”
He turned to the door.

Deeming couldn’t, for once, help himself. He blurted out, “What happens
if I refuse?”

The pudgy man did not quite turn back to face him. “You promise me you
will forget this interchange,” he said casually, “especially if asked by
one of the gentlemen in the pretty cloaks.”

“And that’s all?”

For the first time a glint of amusement crossed the bland features.
“Except for wondering, for all the days of your life, what you might
have missed.”

Deeming wet his lips. “Just tell me one thing. If I go see your Mr.
Rockhard, and have a talk, and still want to refuse …?”

“Then of course you may. If you want to.”

“Let’s go,” said Deeming. They were high over the city in a luxurious
helicopter before it occurred to him that “If you want to,” said the way
the man had said it, might have many meanings. He turned to speak, but
the man’s face, by its very placidity, said that this was a man whose
job was done and who would not add one syllable to cap it.

Richard E. Rockhard had blue-white hair and ice-blue eyes and a way of
speaking that licked out and struck deep like a series of sharp skilled
axe blows, cutting deep, careless of the chips. This tool’s edge was
honed so fine it was a gentleness. Deeming could well believe that this
man was Galactic Mines and all those other things. He could also believe
that Rockhard needed help. He was etched with anxiety and the scarlet
webs of capillaries in his eyeballs were bloated with sleeplessness. He
was a man who was telling the truth because he had not time to lie. “I
need you, Deeming. I am supposing that you will help me and will speak
my piece accordingly,” he said, as soon as they were alone in a fabulous
study in an unbelievable penthouse. “I give you my word that you will be
in no danger from me unless and until you do help me. If you do proceed
with it, you may be sure the danger is sizeable.” He nodded to himself
and said again, “Sizeable.”

Deeming, the hotel clerk, got just this far with his clerkly posture:
“Mr. Rockhard, I am absolutely mystified as to why you should turn to a
man like me for any …” because Rockhard brought both hands down with a
crash and leaned half across his desk. “Mr. Deeming,” he said, in his
gentle, edged voice, with all the power in the world throttled way back
and idling at the ready, “I know about you. I know it because I needed
to find such a man as you and I have the resources to do it. You may
wear that common-man pose if it makes you comfortable, but do not
deceive yourself that it deceives me. You are not a common man or—to put
it on the very simplest terms—you would not be in this room at this
moment, because the common man will not be tempted by anything which he
knows offends the Angels.”

So Deeming dropped the invisibility, the diffidence, the courtesy and
deference of an assistant to an associate, and said, “It is hardly safe
for even an uncommon man to offend them.”

“You mean me? I’m perfectly safe from you, Deeming. You wouldn’t report
me, even if you knew I couldn’t strike back. You don’t _like_ Angels.
You never met another man before who didn’t like them. Therefore you
like me.”

Deeming had to smile. He nodded. He thought, but when is he going to
point out that if I don’t help him he will blackmail me?

“I will not blackmail you,” said the old man surprisingly. “I will pull
you into this with rewards, not push you into it with penalties. You are
a man whose greed speaks higher than his fear.” But he smiled when he
said it. Then without waiting for any response at all, he made his
proposition.

He began to speak of his son. “When you have unlimited credit and an
only son, you begin by being quite certain that you can extend yourself
through him to the future; for he is your blood and bone, and he will of
course want to follow in your footsteps. And if it occurs to you that he
might veer from that course—it never does occur to you until late in the
game, too late—then you let the situation get past curing by the smug
assumption that the pressures you can put on him will accomplish what
your genes could not.”

“Ultimately you realize that you have a choice—not the choice of keeping
or losing him; you’ve lost that already; but the choice of throwing him
out or letting him go. If you care more for yourself and what you’ve
built than you do for your son, you throw him out, and good riddance.
I”—he stopped to wet his lips and glanced quickly at Deeming’s face and
back to his folded hands—“I let him go.”

He was still a moment and then suddenly wrenched his hands apart and
then laid them carefully and silently side by side before him. “I don’t
regret it, because we are friends. We are good friends, and I helped him
in every way I could, including not helping him when he wanted to make
his own way, and giving him whatever he asked me for whether or not I
thought it was valuable.” He smiled suddenly, and whispered more to his
sleeping hands than to Deeming, “For a son like that, if he wants to
paint his belly blue, you buy the paint.”

He looked at Deeming. “The blue paint is archaeology, and I bought it
for him. Dead diggings, pure knowledge, nothing that will make a dime to
buy a bun with. That isn’t my kind of work or my kind of thinking, but
it’s all Donald wants.”

“There’s glory,” said Deeming.

“Not this trip. Now hear me out. That boy is willing to disappear, cease
to exist, become nothing at all, just to follow a thread which almost
certainly leads nowhere, but which, if it leads somewhere, can become
only an erudite curiosity like the Rosetta stone or the Dead Sea scrolls
or the frozen language in the piezo-crystals of Phygmo IV.” He spread
his hands and immediately put them back to bed. “Blue paint. And I
bought it.”

“What do you mean ‘cease to exist—become nothing’? You don’t mean ‘die,’
you mean something else.”

“Good, good, Deeming. Very perceptive. What it means is that in order to
pursue this Grail of his, he must expose himself to the Angels. They
can’t stop him, but they can wait for him to come back. And I bought him
another bucket of paint for that. He has a paid-up ticket to Grebd.”

Deeming unhesitatingly released the low whistle. Grebd was the name of a
sun, a planet and a city in the Coalsack matrix, where certain of the
inhabitants had developed a method of pseudosurgery unthinkably far in
advance of anything in the known cosmos. They could take virtually any
living thing and change it as drastically as it wanted to be changed,
even from carbon-base to boron-chain, or as subtly as it might want,
like an alteration of all detectible brainwave characteristics or
retinal patterns, or even a new nose. They could graft (or grow?) most
of a whole man from a tattered lump, providing it lived. Most important,
they could make these alterations, however drastic, and (if requested)
leave the conscious mind intact.

But the cost of a major overhaul of this nature was beyond reason—unless
a man had a reason compelling enough. Deeming looked at the old man with
unconcealed awe. Not only had he been able to pay such a price, he had
been willing—willing in a cause in which he could have no sympathy. To
care that much for a son—to care so very much that the most he could
ever hope for now would be to meet a total stranger in an unexpected
place who might take him aside and whisper, _“Hello—Dad!”_ but for whom
he could do nothing further. For if he had transgressed some ruling of
the Angels so drastically as to need a trip to Grebd, the Angels would
have an eye on the old man for all time to come, and he would not dare
even to smile at the new stranger. Such a transgression meant death.
Could a father so much as clasp his son’s hand under such circumstances?

“In the name of all that’s holy,” Deeming breathed, “What did he want so
badly?”

Rockhard snorted. “Some sort of a glyph. There’s a theory that the
Aldebaranian stock sprang from the same ethnic roots as those in the
Masson planets. It sounds like nonsense to me, and even if it’s true,
it’s still nonsense. But certain vague evidence points to a planet
called Revelo. There may be artifacts there to prove the point.”

“Never heard of it,” said Deeming. “Revelo … n-no. And so he makes his
discovery. And goes to Grebd. And gets his total disguise. And forever
after, he can’t claim the discovery he made.”

“Now you know about Donald,” said the old man wryly. “He just wants the
discovery made. He doesn’t care who makes it.”

They looked at each other in shared bafflement. At last Deeming nodded
slightly to convey the thought that it didn’t matter if he understood.
If Donald Rockhard was crazy, that was beside the point. He said, “Now
where do the Angels come into this?”

“Revelo,” said the old man, “is—Proscribed.”

Well then, Deeming thought instantly, that seems to be that, and where’s
the problem? A Proscribed planet was surrounded by a field of such a
nature that if it was penetrated by a flickership, anything organic
aboard would instantly and totally cease to live. If Donald had gone to
Revelo, Donald was dead. If he had been snapped out of hyperspace on the
way there by the outer-limit warning field, and had heeded the warning,
then he hadn’t landed on Revelo, hadn’t broken an Angel dictate, and
wasn’t in trouble. Deeming said so.

Slowly Rockhard shook his head. “He’s on Revelo right now, and alive.
Far as I know,” he added.

“Not possible,” said Deeming flatly. “You just don’t penetrate the field
around a Proscribed planet and live.”

“Very well,” said the old man, “nevertheless he’s there. Look, I’ll tell
you something that only four other men know. There is a way to get
through to a Proscribed planet.”

“About thirty years ago one of my ships happened on a derelict. God
alone knows where it came from. It was a mess, but it contained two
lifeboats intact. Lifeboats with flicker drive.”

“Boats? They must be big as ships, then.”

“Not these. They do the same thing as our flicks, but they don’t do it
the same way. It isn’t understood yet just how, though I have a man
working on it. The captain of my freighter brought ’em back for me, for
my spacecraft collection, never knowing just what he had. We found that
out by accident. We fitted them out with Earth-type controls, but
although we know what button to push, we don’t know what happens when we
push it. It worked no better than our own flicks, so there was no point
in filing the information with the Improvement Section. And when we
found out the ships would penetrate the Proscribed planets, we just kept
our mouths shut. I have my opinion of the Angels, but I will say that
when they proscribe a planet, they do it for a good reason. It may have
rock-plague aboard, or, worse still, yinyang weed. Or it may be just
that the planet is deadly to humans, because of its sun’s radiation or
the presence of some hormone poison.”

“Yeah,” agreed Deeming, “Nantha, Sirione, and that devil’s world Keth.”
He shuddered. “Glad they keep us off that one. Guess you’re right—the
Angels know what they’re doing just this once.… What’s so special about
Revelo, that it’s Proscribed?”

“As usual, the Angels won’t say. It might be anything. As I say, I trust
them for that, and I’m not going to be the one who spreads around a
device to make it possible for anyone to penetrate any of ’em.”

“Except Donald.”

“Except Donald,” Rockhard conceded. “For that I have no excuse. If
something there kills him, it’s a chance he was willing to take. If he
brings something out inadvertently, it will be taken care of on Grebd.
And I know he won’t bring out anything on purpose, like yinyang seeds.
Explain it all away, don’t I?” His voice changed, as if some internal
organist had shut down all the stops and grouped out new ones. “Don’t
tell me I shouldn’t have done it. I know that. I knew it then. But I’d
do it again, hear? I’d do it again if it was what he wanted.”

There was silence for a time and Deeming turned his head away as a
decent person might, offering privacy to another. Rockhard said, “We
found out how the little alien flickers penetrate the Proscribed
planets. They turn it inside out. An analogue might be the way a surge
of current will reverse the polarity on a DC generator. We found out,”
he said bleakly, “that if that happens, the flicker goes in harmlessly.
And then when it comes out, the field will kill anyone aboard.” He
raised his head and looked at Deeming blindly. “Don doesn’t know that,”
he whispered.

Deeming said, “Oh.”

After a while he spoke again, incredulously. “I think you’re saying that
I … that somebody has to go there and tell him.”

“Tell him? What would he do if you told him?”

“Wouldn’t the flicker reverse the polarity a second time?”

“Not from the inside. Besides, that polarity reverse is only an analogy,
Deeming. No, what has to be done is to take him this,” and from the desk
drawer, he scooped two tiny cylindrical objects. Both together were less
than the length of his little finger, smaller in diameter than a pen.
Deeming rose and went to the desk and took one of them up. There were
four separate coils rigidly mounted on the cylinder, toroids, each wound
with what seemed to be thousands of precise turns of microscopically
fine wire. At one end was an octagonal recess, meant apparently to
receive a rotating shaft, as well as a spring collar designed to clamp
the device down. The other end faded to insubstantiality, neither
transparent nor opaque, but both and neither, and acutely unsettling to
watch for more than a second or two.

“Replacement freak coils for the flickerfield,” he diagnosed. “But I
never saw them this tiny. Are they models?”

“The real thing,” said Rockhard tiredly. “And actually an improvement on
the one the aliens put on those boats. Apparently they never encountered
the kind of deathtrap the Angels use, or they might well have designed
one like this.”

“What do they do?”

“Put a certain randomness in the frequency of the flickerfield, when it
approaches a Proscribed area. Just as a flickerfield works by making a
ship, in effect, exist and cease to exist in normal space, so that it
doesn’t exist at any measurable time as real mass, and can therefore
exceed the velocity C, so this coil detects and analyses the frequency
of the Angel’s death-field, and phases with it. The death-field doesn’t
kill anything because the approaching ship ceases to exist before it
enters the field and does not exist again until it is through it. Unlike
the one Donald tried, it doesn’t affect the field or reverse its
direction.”

“So if Donald gets one of these and replaces his frequency coil with
it …”

“He can forget the existence of the Angel’s field.”

“On Revelo or any other Proscribed planet.” Deeming tossed the coil and
caught it. He held it up and sighted past it at Rockhard. “I’ve got a
whole cosmos full of bad trouble here in my hand,” he said steadily.

“You have every rotten plague and dangerous plant pest known to
xenology, right here in your hand,” agreed Rockhard.

“And yinyang weed. Lots of money in yinyang weed,” said Deeming
reflectively. Yinyang (derived from the old Chinese yin and yang), the
two-colored disc divided by an S-shaped line, and representing all
opposites—good and evil, light and dark, male and female, and so on—as
well as the surprising fact that the flowers were an almost perfect
representation of the symbol in red and blue, was by far the most
vicious addictive drug ever known, because not only was it potent and
virtually incurable, it increased the addict’s intelligence fivefold and
his physical strength two to three times, and he became an inhuman
behemoth with the sole desire to destroy anything and everything between
himself and his source of supply, able to outlast, outthink, outfight
and outrun anyone of his species.

“If you’re really thinking about making money out of yinyang, you’re a
swine,” said Rockhard evenly, “and if that was meant as a joke, you’re
an oaf.”

Deeming locked eyes with him for a moment, then dropped his eyes.
“You’re right,” he muttered. He put the coil carefully down on the desk
next to its mate.

Rockhard said, “You worry me, Deeming. If I thought you’d use these
coils for any such thing I’d … well, Donald can die. He’d die gladly, if
he knew.”

Deeming said soberly, “Can you find a man willing to breach an Angel’s
command who is not also willing to take anything that comes his way?”

_“Touché,”_ said Rockhard, with a bitter and reluctant grin. “You have a
head on your neck. Well, have you got the picture? You’re to go to
Revelo in the other alien lifeboat, equipped with this coil. Slip
through the field, locate Donald, tell him what’s happened, and see that
his coil is replaced with this other one. Then off he goes to Grebd for
his—his camouflage job.”

“And what do I do?”

“Come back with a message from Don. He’ll know which one. When I hear it
I’ll know if you’ve done the job.”

“If I haven’t I won’t come back,” said Deeming bluntly, and realized as
he said it that, incredibly, he had at some point decided to do this
crazy thing. “And what do you do if I come back and say ‘Mission
accomplished’?”

“I’m not going to name a figure. It’s a little like the way top
executives get paid, Deeming. After a certain point you stop talking
salary, and a man begins drawing what he needs for expenses—any
expenses—against the value of his holdings. When his holdings go up to a
certain level the company stops keeping books on what he draws. It’ll be
like that with you. You just take what you want, as often as you like,
for as long as you live. One man might break up this organization by
throwing assets away, but he’d have to work all day every day for a good
long while to do it.”

“We … ah … have no contract, Mr. Rockhard.”

“That’s right, Mr. Deeming.”

He’s saying, thought Deeming, you can trust me. And I can. But I can’t
say that to him. He’d have to answer no. He said cruelly, “You ought to
let him die.”

“I know,” said Rockhard.

“I’m a damn fool,” said Deeming. “I’ll do it.”

Rockhard held out his hand and Deeming took it. It was a warm firm hand
and when it let go it withdrew slowly as if it regretted the loss of
contact, instead (like some) of falling away in relief. This was a man
who meant what he said.

Which of course, he thought, is only another species of damn fool, when
you get down to it.

Why me?

That was the base thought, the kingpin thought, the keystone thought of
everything that happened between that first meeting and the day he
coined off for Revelo. By that time he knew the answer.

Begin at Earth, go to Revelo, do a little job, and return. If it had
been just that, and that’s all, there wouldn’t have been a reason for
Deeming’s presence in the matter. The nameless pudgy man could have done
it; the old man could have done it himself. But there were—details.

There were the two interminable briefing sessions. He had the new coil;
all he had to do was plug it into the alien ship.

But the alien ship was hidden far from Earth.

All right; given the ship, all he needed was to drop a Revelo
course-coin into his autopilot and push the button.

But he didn’t have a Revelo course-coin. Nobody had a Revelo
course-coin. Few people even knew where it was. There was a coin,
certainly. In the files at Astro City on Ybo. He’d have to get that one.
The files …

The files were in the Angel Headquarters building.

Well, if he got the ship, and if he got the coin, and if Rockhard was
right and the new coil worked properly, not only to get him through the
death-field but back out again, and if this could be done without
alerting an Angel (Rockhard’s reasoning was that by turning the field
inside out, Don had almost certainly alerted them, but that the new
design, which would not—he hoped—touch or affect the field, would permit
Deeming to get in and both of them to get out again without activating
any alarms. So that for an indeterminate time the Angels must operate on
their original information—that one ship had gone in, none come out),
and if Donald Rockhard were alive, and if he knew what message to give
Deeming and if Deeming got back all right and if Rockhard understood the
message properly and if, after all this, Rockhard paid off, why then,
this looked like a pretty good deal. And also clearly something that
only a man like Deeming could possibly accomplish.

So there were the two long briefings with Rockhard and his scientific
assistant Pawling (of whose discourse Deeming caught not one word in
nine), and a hurried trip back to his own quarters, where he wrote
suitable letters to the hotel and to his housing and food depots and
maintenance and communications services and so on and on, including the
mailing of the goat’s wrist-watch where it would do him the most good,
and the paying of bills for liquor and clothing and garage, and,
and … (“How doth the little busy bee/Keep from flipping his lid like
me?” he sang insanely to himself as he did all the things that would
assure the hive that it could rest easy, nobody was doing anything
unusual around here, honest.) When he was finished with it his affairs
were ready for him to resume in a couple of weeks, or, if not, a small
secondary wave of assurances to the trades, comforts, and services would
go out announcing a minor accident, and making arrangements for another
two weeks’ absence, and then another ripple reporting a new job on
Bluebutter, which was somewhere among the Crabs, and at last a line to a
bartender, _How are you Joe?_ to be mailed at the end of two years. If
that one ever got mailed, he’d be eighteen months dead, and if he
thought he had cold feet before, he was afraid to bend his toes when he
wrote it.

The day came (was it really only four days since he started out to fence
a watch and faced a knocking door?) for departure. Rockhard shook his
hand, and Deeming for the second time felt that warm contact and, along
with it, a thing in the old cold eyes that could only be covered by the
word ‘pleading.’ If the pleading had words, what would they be? _Bring
my boy out_. Or, _Let me trust you_. Or maybe, _Don’t doubt me: don’t
ever doubt me_. Perhaps, _You’re my kind, boy—a pretty sleazy edition,
but anyway my kind, so … take care of yourself, whatever_. He handed
Deeming more cash money than he had had in his hand since the night he
gathered up the big pot at the poker game and handed it over to the guy
who won it from him on the next hand. But this time it was only expense
money, not even figured in. Rockhard probably never knew how close he
came to losing his man by the size of that pittance. Or maybe he did.
The pudgy man and the chauffeur were about as easy to shake from that
moment until coin-off as a coat of shellac.

And did he lean back in cozy cushions and watch a band of loving friends
waving from the blockhouse? He did not. He left the house in the back of
a utility truck, which pulled up in utter darkness inside a building
somewhere. He was hustled wordlessly into a side room, shoehorned into a
power suit, and rammed into a space fully as tall as the underneath of a
studio couch and round—torturously, about two hand-breadths less than he
was tall, so that he couldn’t straighten out. They welded him in, at
which point he discovered that his honey-pipe had not been given the
quarter turn necessary to open it to the converters. He spent almost the
entire night trying to grip it with his southern cheeks, which he found
indifferently prehensile and, as time went on, demanding of differential
subtleties that he would have sworn were beyond his control. He was
wrong; he succeeded by laborious fractions and got it open and at last
lay sweat-drenched and limp with effort and relief. And then more time
flowed through his prison than any small space ought to hold, when he
had nothing to do but think.

And the only thing he could think about, and that over and over, was
that he really wasn’t too uncomfortable or distressed by this
imprisonment, because he seemed to be conditioned to it. He had, after
all, for some years lived huddled in mediocrity with his hotel job
pulled no less tight around him than this welded steel pillbox. His
excursions as the disappearing Jimmy the Flick were no less confined;
confined by limited time, limited targets, and the ubiquitous golden
Angels with their wise kind faces and understanding voices, God burn ’em
all. They were supposed to be unkillable, but he’d sure like to get one
for Christmas and make some simple tests lasting till, say, Midsummer
Eve. They, more than anyone, kept the sky closed over him, so he had to
walk everywhere with his head bent. He tried to imagine what it would be
like to walk in a place where his personal sky had room for a whee of a
jump and a holler that anyone could hear and the hell with them; but the
wish was too far from his conditioning and bounced him right back to the
uncomfortable thought that he was not uncomfortable here, and so around
he went again on the synapse-closed box, closed sky. Damned strong
gentle Angels—how would it be to run tall someplace? But I can’t quite
grasp that, here in this closed sky.

And then he slept, and then the surface under him rumbled and tipped,
and, lo and behold, it was only the next morning after all.

He switched on his penetroscope and waited impatiently while the
pseudo-hard radiation fumbled its way through the beryl hull metal and
the image cleared. His prison was being lifted by a crane onto a lowboy
trailer, which began to move as soon as it had its load. It tumbled out
to the apron where the ship waited, belly down like some wingless
insect, with its six jointed jacks, one of which was footless and
supported by a tall gantry which had thrust out a boom to hold up the
limb, like a groom holding up a horse’s split hoof while the stableboy
runs for the liniment.

The lowboy was positioned under the leg, and Deeming blinked at the
pounding and screeching going on above him as his tomb was bolted to the
landing jack and became a part of it. Then there was a quiet time as
tools and ground hands got clear, ports and locks were battened, and the
crew assumed coin-off stations. Somewhere a whistle was blowing; Deeming
could hear it through his radio, picking it from the intercom, which in
turn had it from an outside microphone in the hull. It stopped, and
there was a rumbling purr as all six legs began to straighten, pushing
the ship up off the ground so that most of the terrestrial matter
included in its flicker-field would be air.

Then without warning the earth was gone, the vanished ship lightyears
away already before the gut-bumping boom of its airimplosion could
sound. Deeming’s stomach lurched, and then there was gravity again and a
scene in his ’scope—a rolling grey-green landscape, with a few
cylindrical buildings and a half-dozen docking pads.

That’s the trouble with space travel nowadays, he thought glumly.
They’ve taken all the space out of it.

The ship hovered perhaps a thousand feet high, drawing anti-grav power
from the beam generator down below. It drifted slowly downwards,
positioning itself over one of the empty pads.

Pad 4.

According to his briefing, the correct pad was number 6. With rising
anxiety he saw that 6 was already occupied by a small sport flicker.

There was only one way he would ever get out of here, and that was in
Pad 6. Nobody in the ship knew he was there. He was not even sure of the
origin or destination of the ship, or on which planet they were now
landing. If it set down in the wrong pad, he would stay right where he
was, leave with the ship, and either starve or set up a howl with his
radio and get dragged out at the wrong place at the wrong time by the
wrong people.

He turned on his transmitter, fingered it to docking frequency, and said
authoritatively, “Wear off, skipper. Pad 6 is ours.” He waited tensely.
He hoped the ground control would think it was hearing a crewman
speaking to the captain while the captain thought he was hearing ground
control.

He heard murmurs in the intercom but could not pick them up clearly. The
ship steadied, then began to sink again. He waited tensely, begging his
brains to come up with something, anything, then literally sobbed with
relief as a space-suited figure tumbled out of the blockhouse and
sprinted for the sportster in Pad 6. The little ship lifted and slid
into 4, and Deeming’s ship settled into its assigned berth.

For a moment Deeming lay trembling with reaction, and then grinned. He
wondered if the captain and the control officer, sitting over a beer
later, would think to ask each other who had called out to wear off.
That, he said, is how fights start in bars.

He scanned once around him with the ’scope and thereafter ignored the
scene. He grasped the metal ring in the center of the floor of his
prison and turned it. Faintly, he felt the slight tapping of a relay
sequence, and then the surface on which he lay began to descend. Down it
went to ground level and still down. He snapped on his helmet light
confidently; nothing would be seen from outside but the great round jack
foot pressed solidly against the concrete pad. Who could know that its
sole pressed a matched disc of concrete down into the ground?

The movement stopped and Deeming saw the niche in the concrete wall to
his right. He swiftly rolled into it, the surface which had carried him
down already starting back up. Silently it slid by him—he had not
realized it was so thick—until it formed a roof for the underground room
which now was revealed. He dropped down to the floor. The space was
tiny, just enough for himself and the tiny alien lifeboat which lay
welcoming him with glitters of gold from its polished, dust-bloomed
surface.

It was a sphere, at first sight far too small to be good for anything.
The single bucket seat had been designed for a being considerably
shorter than he, and narrower too, he realized, grunting, as he wedged
himself into it. The controls were few and simple. The hull material
was, from inside, totally transparent. The entire power plant must be
under the seat.

He thumbed the sensors at his waist, and settled back to wait. In a
moment he heard the hiss of air as his power suit flooded the tiny
cabin, and then the sensors, having analyzed the atmosphere and
pressure-checked the seals, tinkled cheerfully. With a sigh of relief he
wrung his helmet off and unclamped his gauntlets. From his pouch he
found the course-coin for Ybo, an osmium disc with irregular edges like
a particularly complicated cam. He dropped it in the slot of the course
box, and confidently thumbed the red button.

There was no sound. The boat seemed to settle a little, and there was a
measurable flash of that indescribable, discomfiting greyness to be seen
outside. Deeming was not worried about the sudden vacuum he had created
in the hole. It would hardly be noticed amid the rumblings and scrapings
of dockside, and the chances were that air would seep in slowly enough
to make the whole thing unnoticed.

He looked around him with pleasure. Rockhard’s people had really set
things up properly. Though a flickership could coin off from anywhere,
on, over, or under the surface, planet falls were generally made high.
Contact with anything on the ground from a child’s toy to an innocent
bystander could be unpleasant. It wouldn’t hurt the ship, which would
flick out of existence and remove itself automatically at the slightest
sign of coexistent matter, but the less resilient planet-bound object
would not be so fortunate. One solution was a landing plate, and that
was what had been supplied here. It beamed the ship in and brought it to
contact unless there was enough heavy matter in the way to be dangerous,
in which case the beam operated but the landing guide did not, and the
craft would appear with good safe altitude. The device was no larger
than a dinner plate, and buried under a sprinkling of topsoil it was
undetectable.

The lifeboat nestled near the bottom of a deep narrow cut in hilly land.
It was night. A brook burbled pleasantly somewhere close by. Weeds
nodded and swayed all about; a searcher would have to fall over the ship
before he could see it. Deeming unhesitatingly unbuttoned the canopy and
swung it back. He had been on Ybo before and knew it as one of the few
“perfect” Terran planets. He breathed the soft rich air with real
pleasure, then rose and shucked out of his power suit and stowed it on
the seat. He pulled the creases out of his trustworthy reversible
jacket, checked his pockets to see that he had everything he needed,
closed and locked the canopy, and climbed the steep side of the gully.

He found himself at the edge of a meadow. A beautiful planet, he told
himself cheerfully. He stretched, for a moment capturing that open-sky
fantasy of his. Then he saw moving lights and shrank down into the long
grass, and his personal sky was tight down over him again.

It was only a ground car, and he certainly could not be seen. He watched
it veer closer to him and then pass not thirty paces away. Good; a road
was just what he was looking for.

He took careful bearings of the bank on which he stood, and then
followed the crest of it down to the road. He was gratified to see a
milepost by the coping of a stone bridge which carried the road over the
brook he had heard. Finding this place again would not be difficult.

He strode cheerfully along the road towards the loom of city lights that
limned the wooded hills close ahead. He was still in his _why me?_
phase, and he had a moment of real regret that Rockhard could not have
shared this adventure with him, or even done it alone. Well … if he
wanted to give away unlimited chunks of credit for work as pleasant as
this, it was his hard luck.

He mounted the hill and suddenly the city was all around him. His
landing spot wasn’t at the edge of town—it was in Astro City’s huge
Median Park. Why, there was the Astro Center, not five minutes away!

It was an impressive building, one of those low, winged structures which
seem to be so much larger on the inside than they are outside. Wide
shallow steps led up to the multiple doors. It must have been early in
their evening; the place was still busy, and ablaze with lights. Deeming
knew it was open all night, but later the crowds of spacemen, shipping
clerks, students of navigation, flicker techs and school children would
thin out. Wonderful, he thought. If he needed crowds, here they were. If
not, not.

At the top of the steps a slender girl in her mid-teens emerged from the
door and stopped to answer his automatic smile radiantly. And to his
intense astonishment she sank to one knee and bowed her head.

“Ah, don’t, my child—please don’t,” said a resonant voice behind him,
and a tall Angel swept by him and lifted the girl to her feet. He
touched her cheek playfully, smiled, and went into the building. The
girl stood looking after him, her hand pressed to her cheek and her eyes
bright. “Oh,” she murmured, “Oh, I wish …” Then she seemed to become
aware of Deeming standing beside and behind her, and stepped to the side
in confusion. “I’m so sorry. I’m in your way.”

In spite of the fact that he wore the brown uniform of mediocrity—his
nondescript suit and pathetic crisp moustache—he said with the voice of
Jimmy the Flick, “Finish your wish, pretty. You’ll never get a wish that
you break in the middle.” And he smiled the glittering happy smile that
never belonged with the small silly moustache and desk clerk Deeming’s
invisible unnoticeable crowd’s face. Inwardly he seethed. He had been
frightened by the sudden appearance of the Angel; captivated by the girl
and the utter adoration which for a crazy moment he had thought was his;
intoxicated by the nearness of this last barrier to his quest,
hyperalert because of it. And so for the very first time Jimmy the Flick
smiled from the desk drudge’s face, creating a new person whose actions
he could not quite predict. Like the swift glance he threw upwards. Why
that? Why, the sky, of course: he had felt the shuttering sky move
upwards a bit to give him room to move. Well, _sure_, he thought in a
burst of astonishment, _there’s much more room to move when you don’t
know what move you might make next_. A crazy moment, all this in a click
of time, and the girl was taking from him his astonished smile in its
mismatched face and giving it back to him hued with all the tints of
herself, saying, “Breaking my wish …? Oh, I did, didn’t I?”

She put her hand to her hot throat and looked swiftly into the building
where the Angel had disappeared. “I wish I were a boy.”

He laughed so abruptly and so loudly that everyone on the steps stopped
to catch a piece of it and go on, smiling. “That’s a wish that deserves
breaking,” he said, making no slightest attempt to hide his admiration
of her. She was slender and tall and had one of those rare gentle faces
which can move untouched through any violence.

“But who ever heard of a girl Angel?” she said.

“Oh, so that’s your trouble. Now why would you want to be an Angel?”

“To do what they do. I never yet saw an Angel do a thing I wouldn’t want
to be doing. To help, to be kind and wise and strong for people who need
something strong.”

“You don’t have to be one of them to learn all those things.”

“Oh yes, you do!” she said, in a tone that would accept no argument or
discussion. He understood, and grudgingly agreed. Thinking like an Angel
did not give one the sheer strength nor the resources to act like one.
“Well, even if you could become a man, that wouldn’t make you an Angel.”

“But then I could get to be one,” she said, craning her neck to look far
out over the plaza where there was a glimpse of gold from the cloak of
another of the creatures. She glowed when she saw it, even so distantly,
and brought the glow full on Deeming when she faced him again. It was
unsettling as hyperspace.

“Are you sure of that? Were they just plain men before they were
Angels?”

“Of course they were,” she said with that devoted positiveness. “They
couldn’t be so much to humans without being human first of all.”

“And how do they get to be Angels?” he bantered.

“No one knows that,” she conceded. “But, you see, if a man can become
one, and if I was a man, I’d find out and do it.”

He stood in the full radiation of her intense feeling and irrationally
admitted that if she were a man and wanted to be an Angel, or wanted
anything else that much, she’d probably make it.

“I’d like to think they were just men, at that,” he said.

“You can be sure of it. What’s your name?”

“What? Uh …” The strange first fusion of Deeming the Invisible with
Jimmy the Flick had him disoriented, and he could not answer. He covered
it with a cough, and said, “I’ve just come in from Bravado to this place
I’ve heard so much about.”

If she noticed that he had avoided her question, or wondered about such
a place as Bravado, she gave no sign. The worlds were full of slightly
odd people these days and the sky full of names. She said, “Oh, may I
show it to you? I work here. I’m just off duty, and I really have
nothing else to do.”

He wished he knew what her name was. He soaked up this eagerness of
hers, this total defenselessness, trust, earnest generosity, and felt a
great choking wash of feeling of a kind quite alien to him. He cared
suddenly, cared desperately about what might happen to her in the years
to come, and wished he could spare her whatever would be wrong for her;
wished he could run before her and remove anything over which she might
stumble, kill anything which might sting her; guard her, warn her … He
wanted to grip her shoulders and shake her and shout, look out for me,
beware the stranger; trust no one, help no one, just look out for
yourself! The feeling passed, and he did not touch her or speak of it.
He glanced into the building and remembered that there was something he
needed in there and must have, no matter what he had to use to get it.
He would use this girl if he had to; he knew that too. He didn’t like
knowing it, but know it he most painfully did. He said, “Well, thanks!
It’s very kind of you.”

“No it isn’t,” she said, with that faithful ardor of hers. “I love this
place. Thank _you_,” and she turned and went in. He followed humbly.

Hours later he had what he wanted. Or, at least, he knew where it was.
Among a hundred sections, a hundred thousand file banks, dozens of vista
rooms with their three-dimensional map of all corners of the known
cosmos, among museum halls with their displays of artifacts of great,
strange, dead, new, dangerous, utterly mysterious cultures of the past
and present, there was a course-coin for Revelo—a little button of a
thing which a man could hide in his hand, and which bore the skills to
pilot him to the Proscribed planet, and through which, like light
through a pinhole, all his being must now pass, to fan out on the other
side and place him in a picture of wealth beyond imagining. He glanced
at the girl walking so confidently beside him and knew again that
whatever she was worth, she wasn’t important enough to turn him aside,
precious enough to spare if she got in his way. And this made him
inexpressibly sad.

He saw the banks of course-coin dispensers, where any planet’s coin
could be acquired by anyone … well, almost any planet by almost anyone.
Spell out the name of the planet on a keyboard, and in seconds the coin
would drop into a glass chamber below the board. Inspect it through the
glass, and if it bore the right name, press your thumb into a depression
at the right (your thumb would identify you for billing later) and the
chamber opened. Or if you’d miscued it and saw the wrong coin, or
changed your mind, hit the reject button and the coin would be returned
to the bank.

So he punched out K-E-T-H, and a blank disc dropped into the chamber.
_Proscribed_, a lighted sign under the chamber announced.

“Oh, my goodness, you don’t want that one!” cried the girl.

“No,” said Deeming truthfully—of all planets in the universe, Keth was
the most unspeakable. ‘I just wanted to see what happened if you punched
for it.”

“You draw a blank,” said the girl, touching the reject button and
clearing the chamber. “Proscribed coins aren’t even in this area.
They’re kept separately in a guarded file room. Do you want to see it?
Angel Abdasel is the guard; he’s so nice.”

Deeming’s heart leaped. “Yes, I’d like that. But … don’t make me talk to
an Angel. They make me feel … you’re not going to like this …”

“Tell me.”

“They make me feel small.”

“I’m not angry at that!” She laughed. “They make me feel small too!
Well, come on.”

They took a grey tube and floated to the upper level of the low
building, then walked through a labyrinth of corridors and through a
door marked STAFF ONLY, which the girl opened for him, waving him
through with mock gestures of pride and privilege. At the end of the
corridor was a stairway leading down; Deeming could see the corner of an
outer exit down there, and floodlit shrubbery. Near the top of the
stairs was an open doorway; through it Deeming got a glimpse of gold.
There was an Angel in there. Deeming stepped close to the wall, out of
the Angel’s line of sight. “Is this the place?”

“Yes,” she said. “Come on—don’t be shy; Abdasel’s ever so nice.” She
tapped at the doorpost. “Abdasel …”

The resonant voice in the room was warm and welcoming. “Tandy! Come in,
child.”

So her name’s Tandy, thought Deeming dully.

She said, “I’ve brought a friend. Could we …?”

“Any friend of …”

Deeming had Rockhard’s specially designed needler out before he moved to
the doorway. He rested it against the doorframe and put his head
forwards only far enough to sight it with one eye. He fired, and the
needle disappeared silently into the broad golden chest. There had been
no warning for the Angel, and no time. He bent his head in amazement as
if to look at his chest while a hand rose to touch it. The hand simply
stopped. The whole Angel stopped.

“Abdasel …?” whispered the girl, puzzled. She stepped into the room.
“Angel Ab …” She must then have sensed something new in her companion’s
tense posture. She turned to him and eyed the needler in his hand, and
the frozen Angel. “Did … did you—?”

“Too bad, Tandy,” he rasped. “Too damn bad.” He was breathing hard and
his eyes burned. He dashed tears away from them with his free hand
furiously.

“You hurt him,” she said dazedly.

“He never felt a thing. He’ll get over it. You know I have to kill you?”
he blurted in sudden agony.

She didn’t scream, or faint, or even look horrified. She simply said,
“Do you?” in open puzzlement.

He got her out of the way then, not daring to wait a second more for
fear he might debate the matter. He closed his mind down to a single icy
purpose and lived solely with it while he pawed over the Angel’s desk
for an index. He found it—a complete list of Proscribed planets. He
recognized the small keyboard beside the computer for what it was, a
junior version of the dispensers downstairs, lacking the thumb plate
which identified the purchaser.

He took the Angel’s hand. The long arm was heavy, stiff, and noticeably
cold—not surprising considering the amount of heat absorbing _athermine_
particles which the needle was even yet feeding into his bloodstream. It
was enough to freeze an ordinary human solid in minutes, but he had
Rockhard’s assurance that it would not kill an Angel. Not that he cared,
or Rockhard either. For his purposes, the special needle was just as
good either way.

He lifted the heavy hand and used one of its fingers to punch out the
names of eight Proscribed planets, among then, of course, Revelo. He
scooped them out of the receiving chute and dropped them in his pocket.
Then he went to the door and stood holding his breath and listening
intently. No sign of anyone in the corridor.

He whipped off his jacket and reversed it, slipped the inserts in his
heels, removed the moustache and contact lenses, and stepped out into
the corridor. He did not look back (because all he could see whether he
looked or not was what lay crumpled on the floor smiling. Smiling,
through some accident of spasm—a cruel accident which would mark his
inner eye, his inner self, forever).

He went downstairs and out into the night, not hurrying.

He walked towards the park, numb inside except for that old, cold
unhappiness which always signaled his successes. He remembered thinking
that this was only because the take was so small. Well, he needed to
think of a better one than that now.

His sky pressed down on his skull and nape. He watched each step he took
and knew which step to take next.

It was very dark.

He found the road and then the milepost by the bridge. The people he had
passed paid him no attention. When he was quite sure he was unobserved
he slipped into the underbrush and through it to the meadow. He found
the sloping ridge at the lip of the gully and moved along it, seeing
mostly with his leg muscles and his semi-circular canals. He drew his
needler because it was better to have it and not need it than to need it
and not have it; he moved silently because there was such a thing as a
statistical improbability, and when he reached the point over the hiding
place of his boat, he got down on his stomach and lay still, listening.

He heard only the gurgle of the water.

He got out his pencil torch, and held it in the same hand as the
needler, clamping them tightly together and parallel, so that anywhere
the light beam struck could be the exact target for a needle. Then
walking his elbows, worming his abdomen, he crept to the edge and looked
down.

Pitch black. Nothing.

He aimed the needler and torch as close as he could to where the ship
ought to be, put his thumb ready on the stud, and with his other hand
found the light switch and clicked it on.

The narrow beam shot downwards. He was well oriented. The circle of
white picked out the boat and the ground around it, and the figure of
the Angel who sat in a patient posture on top of the boat.

The angel looked up and smiled. “Hello, friend.”

“Hello,” said Deeming, and shot him. The Angel sat where he was, smiling
up into the light, his eyes puckered from the glare. For a long moment
nothing happened, and then, with head still up, and still smiling, the
Angel toppled rigidly off the lifeboat and pitched backwards into the
rocky streambed.

Deeming turned out the light and clambered slowly down into the dark. He
fumbled his way to the boat, unlocked the canopy with the pre-set palm
pattern, and climbed in. Then he cursed and climbed out again and found
the water’s edge and fumbled along it until his hands found the soft,
strong folds of the golden cloak. He blinked his light once, briefly,
and studied the scene as it faded from his retinas. The Angel lay on his
back, turned from the hips so that his legs still held the sitting
position he had been in when shot. His head was still back, but Deeming
had not seen the head; it was under water.

He heaved the big body, lifted it, shifted it until he was sure it was
placed the way he wanted it. A man as big as this Angel would have been
a sizeable load to move around; the Angel was a third again as heavy as
that. (What _are_ they, anyway?)

Then he got back into the boat and buttoned it up. He took his stolen
course-coins and racked them neatly with the ones the ship already had.
And for a while he sat and thought.

_Hello, friend_.

_Her name was Tandy_.

(Old eyes, pleading.)

_“There’s a lot of money in yinyang weed.”_

He shifted in annoyance and pressed his thumbs to his eyes until he saw
sparks. These weren’t the thoughts he was after.

He ran his hand over the coin rack and slipped his fingers behind it to
touch the new flicker-frequency coil which he had plugged in back there.
In these tiny objects he had a potential possessed probably by no human
being since time began. He had free and secret access to eight
Proscribed planets, on some of which there was certainly material that
someone, somewhere, would pay for exorbitantly—completely aside from
yinyang weed. He could assume that he could not be traced from
Ybo … no—no he couldn’t. Say rather that as far as he knew he couldn’t
be traced; as far as he knew he had not been observed. The stories that
were told about the Angels, how they could read minds, even newly dead
minds … and then, for all their strength and confidence, for all their
public stature, did they really feel that one Angel guarding the
Proscribed coins would by his sole presence be sufficient to protect
such potential devastation as those little discs represented? If he,
Deeming, were setting up that office, Angels or no Angels, he’d put in
cameras and alarms and various interlocks, like a particular rhythm
pattern for keying the wanted discs which no outsider could know about.

The more he pursued this line of thought, the less confidence he had
that his trail was cold. The more he thought of this, the more sure he
became that even if they could not follow immediately, they would have
nets spread in more places than even his growing fear could conjure up.

What would he do if he were an Angel and wanted to catch the likes of
Deeming?

First of all, he’d cordon off the Proscribed planets (assuming that the
keyboard had made a record of what coins were taken; and it was
unthinkable that it had not).

Then he’d put a watch on every place known to have been a haunt of the
criminal—on the growing assumption that they could very soon find out
who he was.

If they found out who he was, then special watches would be put on
Rockhard, because the deal with Rockhard would certainly be discovered;
it was too complex and involved too many people to be hidden for long,
once the Angels had any lead at all.

Which meant that Earth was out, the Proscribed planets were out, Ybo and
Bluebutter and anywhere else he’d ever been were out. He had to go to a
new place, somewhere he had never been, where no one would know him,
where there were lots of people to disappear among. Somehow, some way,
he could think his way through to Don Rockhard and some, anyway, of the
riches the old man had promised him.

He sighed and pawed through the coins on the rack until he came to the
one marked Iolanthe. A big planet, a little hard on the muscles for
comfort, but well crowded and totally new to him.

He dropped it into the slot and coined out of there.

Iolanthe was really up to the minute. He came out of flicker with about
a mile of altitude and took a quick look around before he flicked to the
nightside. With a design as unique as the ship’s, he wouldn’t want to
leave it where it would cause comment. So he hung in the sky and fanned
through the communications the planet had to offer.

They were plenty. There was a fine relief map of the planet on perpetual
emanation in conjunction with the space beacon, and a wonderful radio
grid, so it was easy to place himself. There was an entertainment band
and best of all, a news band—a broad one, set up in video frames, each
with its audio loop of comment. He could tune in any page of the entire
sequence. It was indexed and extremely well edited to cover both current
news and background, local and intercultural events.

He started with the most recent bulletins and worked backwards. There
was nothing, and nothing, and nothing that might apply to him, not even
a date line from anywhere he’d been. Until suddenly he found himself
gaping into the face of Richard E. Rockhard.

He turned up the audio.

“… indicted yesterday by C Jury of Earth High Court,” said the announcer
suavely, “on one hundred and eleven counts of restraint of trade,
illegal interlocked directorates, price pegging, monopoly, market
manipulation …” on and on and on. Apparently the old pirate had blown
his balloon too big. “… estimated value of Mr. Rockhard’s estate and
holdings has been estimated in excess of two and three quarter billions,
but in the face of these charges it is evident that the satisfaction of
invoices outstanding, accounts receivable, taxes and penalties will in
all likelihood total to a far higher figure than the assets. These
assets are, of course, in government hands pending a detailed
accounting.”

Slowly, his hands shaking, Deeming reached for the control and turned
the communicator off. He watched, fascinated, as the ruddy, cold-eyed
face of the old man faded away under his hand, distorted suddenly, and
was gone. A trick of his mind, or of the fading electrons, shattered the
picture as it was extinguished, and for the tiniest fraction of a second
it assumed the wordless pleading which had moved him so deeply before.

“Stupid, clumsy old swine,” he growled, too shocked to think of anything
really foul to say.

No money. There wasn’t anything except what the government held. He
could see himself going to the government with a claim like his.

He pawed through the money the old man had given him for incidentals. He
had used none of it so far, but it no longer looked like a lot. He
crammed it back into his pocket and then shook himself hard.

I got to do something. I got to get down there and disappear.

He cut in the penetroscope and switched it to the video. The instrument
resolved night views considerably better than it did images through
beryl steel. He aimed it downwards and got a good sharp focus on the
ground and began hunting out a place to hide his boat. He would want
hilly or rocky ground, a lot of vegetative cover, access to road or
river, and perhaps …

Something golden flashed across the screen.

Deeming grunted and slapped at a control. He caught them, lost them,
caught and hung on to them—three Angels, flying in V formation close to
the ground, with their backpack geo-gravs. They were swiftly covering
the ground in a most efficient area search looking for—well, something
concealed down there, small enough to justify that close scrutiny,
sitting mum enough to justify a visual hunt. Something, say, about the
size of his boat.

On impulse he cut in the ship detectors. The picture reeled and steadied
and reeled again as the detectors scanned and selected, and then gave
him a quick rundown of everything it had found, in order of closest
estimated arrival time at a collision point with him.

To the north and north-east, two small golden ships converging.

To the east, another, and directly above it, another, apparently
maneuvering to fly cover on its partner.

To the south, a large—no, that was nothing, just a freighter minding its
own business. But no—it was launching boats. He zoomed the video on
them. Fighter boats streaking towards him.

To the south-east … The hell with the south-east! He pawed the Revelo
coin out of the rack and banged it down on the slot of the coin box. It
bounced out of his fingers and fell to the deck. He pounced on it and
scrabbled it wildly into his hand.

A luminescent pink cloud bloomed suddenly to his right, another just
behind him. Its significance: stand by for questioning, or else.

His hull began to hum, and, impressed on this vibration as a signal on a
carrier, his whole craft spoke hoarsely to him: “Halt in the name of
Angels. Stand by for tow beam.”

“Yeah, sure,” said Deeming, and this time got the coin to the slot. He
banged the button, and the scene through ports and video alike
disappeared.

He switched off everything he didn’t need and lay back, sweating.

He wouldn’t even glance at the remote, wanly hopeful possibility that
they had mistaken him for someone else. They knew who he was, all right.
And how long had it taken them to draw a bead on him on a planet to
which they could not possibly have known he was going? Thirty minutes?

He found himself staring out of the port, and became shockingly aware
that he was still in hyperspace. He had never been in the grey so long
before; where in time was this Revelo place anyway?

He began to sweat again. Was something wrong with the field generator?
According to the tell tales on the control panel, no; it seemed all
right.

Still the queasy, deeply frightening grey. He blanked out the ports and
shivered in his seat, hugging himself.

What had made him pick Revelo anyhow?

Only an unconfirmed guess that one man had managed to stay alive there.
The other Proscribed planets were death for humans in one form or
another; he had no idea which. Revelo probably was too, for that matter,
but Don Rockhard would hardly have chanced it if it was certain death.

And then maybe—just barely maybe—the new flicker coil really would work
so well in the Revelo death-field that he could slip through without
detection. Maybe, for a while, for a very little while, he could be in a
sheltered place where he could think.

There was a shrill rushing sound from the hull. He stared at the ports
but could see nothing. He switched on the detector and then remembered
the port blanks. He opened them and let the light of Revelo flood in.

He had never seen a sky like this. Masses of color, blue, blue-green,
pink, drifted above him. The dim zenith was alive with shooting sparks.
A great soft purple flame reached from the eastern horizon and wavered
to invisibility almost directly overhead. It pulsed hypnotically.

Deeming shuddered. He set the detector to the task of finding Don
Rockhard’s boat and let it cruise. He started the exterior air analyzer
and sat back to wait.

Since the missing boat was so small and the planet so large, he had to
set his detector’s discriminator very wide and its sensitivity high. And
it found all sorts of things for him—great shining lumps of metallic
copper and molybdenum jutting from the ragged hills, a long wavering row
of circular pools of molten lead, and even the Angel’s warning beacon
and death-field generator. It was obviously untended, and understandably
so; it was self-powered, foolproof, and set in a case that a hydrogen
explosion wouldn’t nick.

He had to sleep after a while, so he set the buzzer to its loudest and
lay back to sleep. It seemed that each time he slept he dreamed and each
time he dreamed, no matter how it began, it always ended with his coming
face to face with a smiling Angel, unarmed, pleasant, just sitting
waiting for him. Each time the buzzer sounded, he leaped frantically to
see what it was reporting. The need to spend a moment with someone else
beside himself, someone else’s ideas besides his turgid miasmas of
flight and dead smiles and kind relentless Angels became urgent,
hysterical, frantic. Each time the buzzer sounded it was rich ore or a
strange electrical fog between two iron crags, or nothing at all, and,
at last, Donald Rockhard’s lifeboat.

By the time he found it he was in a numb and miserable state, the
retreat which lives on the other side of hysteria. He was riding a habit
pattern of sleep and dream, wake and stare; hear the buzzer, lurch at
the screen, get the disappointment, slap the reject button, and go on.
He actually rejected the other lifeboat twice before he realized it, but
his craft began to circle it and the strong fix made it impossible for
the buzzer to be silent. He switched it off at last and hovered, staring
dully at the tiny bronze ball below, and pulling himself back to
reality.

He landed. The craziest thing of all about this crazy place was that the
atmosphere at ground level was Earth normal, though a bit warm for real
comfort. He buttoned the canopy and climbed stiffly out.

There was no sign of Donald Rockhard.

He walked over to the other boat and stooped to look in. The canopy was
closed but not locked. He opened it and leaned inside. There were only
three course-coins in the rack, Earth and Bootes II and Cabrini in Beta
Centauri. He fumbled behind the rack and his fingers found a flat
packet. He opened it.

It contained a fortune—a real fortune in large notes. And a card. And a
course-coin.

The card was of indestructible hellenite, and bore the famous symbol of
the surgeons of Grebd, and in hand script, by some means penetrating all
the way through the impenetrable plastic, like ink through a paper
towel, the legend: _Class A. Paid in full. Accept bearer without
interrogation_. It was signed by an authoritative squiggle and
over-stamped with the well-known pattern of the Grebdan Surgical
Society.

The coin was, of course, to Grebd.

Deeming clutched the treasure into his lap and bent over it, hugging it,
and then laughed until he cried—which he did almost immediately.

To Grebd, for a new face, a new mind if he wanted it—a tail, wings, who
cares? The sky’s the limit.

(The sky—your sky—has always been the limit.)

And then, new face and all, with that packet of loot, to any place in
the cosmos that I think is good enough for me.

“Hey! Who are you? What do you think you’re doing? Get out of my boat!
And drop those things!”

Deeming did not turn. He put up his hands and stopped his ears like a
little child in the birdhouse at the zoo.

“Out, I said!”

Deeming lifted the treasure in shaking hands, rumpling and spilling it.
“Out!” barked the voice, and out he came, not attempting to pick
anything up. He turned tiredly with his hands raised somewhat less than
shoulder height, as if they were much, much too heavy for him.

He faced a hollow-cheeked, weather-beaten young man with the wide-set
frosty eyes of Richard Rockhard. At his feet a cloth sack lay where he
had dropped it on seeing someone in his boat. In his hand, steady as an
I-beam, rested a sonic disrupter aimed at Deeming’s midsection.

Deeming said, “Donald Rockhard.”

Rockhard said, “So?”

Deeming put down his hands, and croaked, “I’ve come to paint your belly
blue.”

Rockhard was absolutely motionless for a long moment, and then as if
they were operated from the same string, his gun arm slowly lowered
while slowly his smile spread. “Well, damn me up and back!” he said.
“Father sent you!”

“Man,” said Deeming exhaustedly, “I’m sure glad you ask questions first
and shoot later.”

“Oh, I wouldn’t’ve shot you, whoever you were. I’m so glad to see
another face that I … Who are you, anyway?”

Deeming told him his name. “Your father found out that when a boat like
yours busts through the Angel’s death-field, it turns it inside out. Or
some such. Anyway, if you’d coined out of here you never would have come
down anywhere.”

Donald Rockhard looked up into the mad sky, paling. “You don’t say.” He
wet his lips and laughed nervously. It was not a funny sound. “And now
that you’ve come to tell me, how do you get out?”

“Don’t look at me like no hero,” said Deeming with the shade of a grin.
“It’s only a matter of plugging in a new freak coil. That’s what I was
doing when I bumped into all that cabbage. I know I had no business
looking it over, but then how often do you bump into four million in
negotiable good cash money?”

“Can’t blame you, at that,” Rockhard admitted. “I suppose you saw what
else was in there.”

“I saw it.”

“The theory is that if you plan to go to Grebd, no living soul should
know about it.”

Deeming glanced at the disrupter hanging from the young man’s hand. The
hand was slack, but then, he hadn’t pulled the weapon away either. He
said, “That’s up to you. Your father trusted me with the information,
though; you ought to know that.”

“Well, all right,” said Rockhard. He put the gun away. “How is he?”

“Your father? Not so good. I’d say he needs you about now.”

“Needs me? Why, if I showed up in the same solar system and the Angels
found out, it’d cost him.”

“No, it wouldn’t,” said Deeming. He told him what had happened to the
old man’s towering structure of businesses. “Not that a lousy four
million’d do much good.”

Rockhard bit his lip. “What do you think I could get for the card?”

Deeming closed his eyes. “That might help,” he nodded.

“I’ve got to get out of here,” said young Rockhard. “You finished with
that coil?”

“Just got the old one out.”

“Finish it up, will you? I’ll just sort out one or two of these.” He
dumped the contents of his sack on the ground and hunkered down over
them.

“That what you’re looking for?” asked Deeming, going to his own boat for
the coil.

The other snorted. “Who knows? They might be potsherds and then again
they might be fossilized mud puddles. I’ll just take the best of ’em for
analysis. You think archaeologists are crazy, Deeming?”

“Sure,” said Deeming from the other boat. “But then, I also think
everybody’s crazy.” He lay belly down on the seat of Rockhard’s boat and
began picking up money. He got it all and the card and stacked them
neatly and slipped them into their packet. Rockhard glanced in at him.

“You taking some of that for yourself?”

Deeming shook his head. He put the packet on its shelf behind the coin
rack. “I’ve been taken care of.” He got out of the boat.

Rockhard got in, and looked up over his shoulder at him. “You better
take some. A lot.”

“I won’t be needing it,” said Deeming tiredly.

“You’re a funny guy, Deeming!”

“Yuk, yuk.”

“Will I see you again?”

“No.”

When Rockhard had no answer to that flat syllable Deeming said, “I’ll
swing your canopy.” Under cover of reaching for the canopy, he got out
his needler and concealed it in his sleeve, with the snout just
protruding between the fingers of his closed fist. His little finger
rested comfortably on the stud. He leaned on the fist, resting on the
cowling right back of Rockhard’s ear.

He said, “Goodbye, Rockhard.”

Rockhard didn’t say anything.

Deeming stood for a long time looking down at the needler in a kind of
dull astonishment. _Why didn’t I shoot?_ Then, when Rockhard’s ship had
flickered and gone, he let his shoulders hang and he slogged through the
hot sand to his boat.

God he was tired.

“Why didn’t you shoot?”

Deeming stopped where he was, not even finishing a stride; one foot
forward, the other back. Slowly he raised his head and faced the golden
giant who leaned casually, smiling, against his boat.

Deeming took a deep breath and held it and let it out painfully. Then in
a harsh flat voice he said, “By God, I can’t even say I’m surprised.”

“Take it easy,” said the Angel. ‘You’re going to be all right now.”

“Oh sure,” said Deeming bitterly. They’d scrape out his brains and fill
his head with cool delicious yogurt, and he’d spend the rest of his
placid life mopping out the Angels’ H.Q., wherever that might be.
“Here,” he said, “I guess you won this fair and square,” and he tossed
his needler to the Angel, who waved a negligent hand. The weapon ceased
to exist in mid-air halfway between them. Deeming said, “You have a
whole bag of tricks.”

“Sure,” said the Angel agreeably. “Why didn’t you shoot young Rockhard?”

“You know,” said Deeming, “I’ve been wondering about that myself. I
meant to. I was sure I meant to.” He raised hollow, bewildered eyes to
the Angel. “What’s the matter with me? I had it made, and I threw it
away.”

“Tell me some more things,” said the Angel. “When you shot that Angel on
Ybo and he fell with his head underwater, why did you take the trouble
to drag him out and stretch him on the bank?”

“I didn’t.”

“I saw you. I was right there watching you!”

“The hell you were,” said Deeming, looked at the Angel’s eyes, and knew
that the Angel meant what he said. “Well, I—I don’t know. I just did it,
that’s all.”

“Now tell me why you knocked out that girl with your fist instead of
killing her and covering your tracks.”

“Her name was Tandy,” said Deeming reflectively. “That’s all I remember
about it.”

“Let’s go way back,” said the Angel easily. “When you left old
Rockhard’s place for an evening to clean up your affairs, you put a
watch in a package and put it in the mail. Who’d you send it to?”

“Can’t recall.”

“I can. You mailed it back to the woman you stole it from. Why,
Deeming?”

“Why, why, why! I always did that, that’s why!”

“Not always. Only when it was a watch which was all the woman had left
of her dead husband, or when it was something of equal value. You know
what you are, Deeming? You’re a softy.”

“You’re having yourself a time.”

“I’m sorry,” said the giant gently. “Deeming, I didn’t win, as you just
put it. You’ve won.”

“Look,” said Deeming, “you’ve caught up with me and I’ll get mine. Let’s
let it go at that and skip the preaching, all right? Right. Let’s go.
I’m tired.”

The Angel put out both hands, fingers slightly spread. Deeming tingled.
He distinctly heard two sharp cracks as his spine stretched and reseated
itself. He looked up sharply.

“Tired now?” smiled the Angel.

Deeming touched his own forearms, his eyelids. “No,” he breathed, “By
God, no, I’m not.” He cocked his head and said reluctantly, “That’s the
first one of your tricks I’ve liked, shorty.” He looked again at the
jovial golden man. “Just what are you guys, anyway? Oh, all right,” he
said immediately, “I know, I know. That’s the question you never answer.
Skip it.”

“_You_ can ask it.” Disregarding Deeming’s slack-jawed astonishment at
that, the Angel said, “Once we were a strong-arm squad. Sort of a small
private army, if you can understand that. All through history there’ve
been mercenaries. Once there was a thug called the Pinkerton man. You
wouldn’t know about that—it was before your time. Our outfit was
operated originally by a man called Angell—with two Ls, and we were
called Angell’s, with an apostrophe S. So the name really came before
the fancy clothes and the Sunday-school kind of activity we go in for
now.”

“And as time went on we recruited more carefully and improved our rank
and file more, and in the meantime our management became less and less,
until finally we didn’t have a management. Just us, and an idea that we
could stop a lot of trouble if we could make people be kind to one
another.”

“You’ve sometimes got an offbeat way of being kind!”

“People used to shoot a horse with a broken leg. It was kind,” said the
Angel.

“So why do you tell me all this?”

“I’m recruiting.”

“What?

“Recruiting,” the Angel said clearly. “Mustering new men. Making new
Angels. Like you, if you want to.”

“Aw, now wait a mucking minute here,” said Deeming. “You’re not going to
stand there and tell me you can turn me into an Angel! Not me, you’re
not.”

“Why not?”

“Not me,” said Deeming doggedly. “I’m not the Angel type.”

“You’re not? What type is a man so big he can’t live one life at a time
but has to play the inverted _and_ upside-down Robin Hood for the
people? Were you aware that you never stole from anyone who did not, in
the long run, benefit by it, learn something from it, and, if he’d lost
something of real importance, he always got it back?”

“Is that really so?”

“I can show you a case history of every single one of them.”

“You’ve been on to me for that long?”

“Since you were in third grade.”

“Cut it out,” said Deeming. “You’d have to be invisible.”

The Angel disappeared. Blinking, Deeming walked slowly over to the hull
and ran his hand over it.

“Not that that’s so marvelous, once you know how it’s done. Do you know
any reason why a flicker-field shouldn’t be refined down to something
the size of your fist?” demanded the Angel’s voice from mid-air. Deeming
whirled and saw nothing. He backed against the boat, wide-eyed. “Over
here,” said the Angel cheerfully, and reappeared to the right. He drew
back his cloak and turned down his waist-band. Deeming briefly glimpsed
a small, curved, flat plastic pack of some kind.

“You’ve got to understand,” said the Angel, “that human beings, by and
large, are by nature both superstitious and reverent. If you substitute
science for their theology, they’ll just get reverent about their
science. All we do is give them what they want anyway. We never pretend
to be anything special, but neither do we deny anything they think about
us. If they think we’re power-hungry slave traders, we prove they’re
wrong. If they think we’re demigods or something, we don’t say anything
at all.

“It works out. There hasn’t been a war in so long that half the
population couldn’t define the word. And we came along when we were
needed most, believe me. When man was expanding against and through
extra-terrestrial cultures. The word had to be spread, or damn well
else.”

“Just exactly what is the word? What are you really after?”

“I’ve already told you, but it sounds so confounded simple that nobody
will believe it until they see it in action, and then they find
something else to describe it. I’ll try you again,” said the Angel,
chuckling. “The word is, _be kind to each other_. It opened the sky.”

“I have to think about that,” said Deeming, overwhelmed. He shook it
off. “Later, I’ll think about it … I hear things about you people. I
hear you don’t eat.”

“That’s so.”

“Or sleep.”

“True. We don’t breed either; we haven’t been able to get our treatment
to take on women, though we’ll make it someday. We’re not a species or a
race, or supermen, or anything like that. We’re descendants, out of
sadism by technology, of the yinyang weed.”

“Yinyang!”

“Our dark and deadly secret,” said the Angel, laughing. ‘You know what
the stuff does to people who take it uncontrolled. In the right hands,
it’s no more addictive than any other medicine. And you see, Deeming,
you don’t, you just _don’t_ increase intelligence by a factor of five
and fail to see that people must be kind to one another. So the word, as
I’ve called it, isn’t a doctrine as such, or a philosophy, but simply a
logical dictate. By the way, if you decide against joining us, don’t go
clacking in public about yinyang, or you’ll get yourself clobbered out
of thin air.”

“What did you say? What?” shouted Deeming. “If I decide against … Have I
a choice?”

“Can you honestly conceive of our forcing you to get people to be kind
to each other?” asked the Angel soberly.

Deeming walked away and walked back again, eyes closed, pounding a fist
into his other hand. “Well, you don’t force me; fine. But I still have
no choice. I’ll take your word for it—though it’ll be months before it
really sinks in—that you boys are off my back. But I can’t go back to
that mess on Earth, with all old Rockhard’s affairs churning around and
the government poking into all his associations, and …”

“What mess did you say?” asked the Angel, and laughed. “Deeming, there
isn’t any mess.”

“But Rockhard …”

“There isn’t any Rockhard. Did you ever hear of any Rockhard before that
fat boy called on you that night?”

“Well, no, but that doesn’t mean- Oh, by golly, it _does_ mean … yeah,
but what about the big smash-up, all Rockhard’s affairs; it was in all
the newscasts, it said right there …”

“In how many newscasts?”

“When I was on Iolanthe! I saw it myself when—oh. Oh. A private
showing.”

“You were in no position to be suspicious,” the Angel excused him
kindly.

“I’ll say I wasn’t. Your flyboys were about to knock me out of the sky.
I could’ve been killed.”

“Right.”

“Matter of fact, suppose I’d kept my mouth shut when I was welded up in
the landing foot of that ship? I might be there yet!”

“Correct.”

“And if I’d bobbled that job on Ybo I could have caught a disrupter
beam.”

“Just get used to it and you won’t be so indignant. Certainly you were
in danger. Everything was set up so that you had right and wrong choices
to make, and a great deal of freedom in between. You made the right
choices and you’re here. We can use you. We couldn’t use a man who might
jump the wrong way in an emergency.”

“They say you’re immortal,” said Deeming abruptly.

“Nonsense!” said the Angel. “That’s just a rumor, probably based on the
fact that none of us has died yet. I don’t doubt that we will.”

“Oh,” said Deeming, and started to think of something else. Then the
full impact of what he had just heard reached him. He whispered, “But
there have been gold-cloaked Angels around for two thousand years!”

“Twenty-three hundred,” said the Angel.

“For that you stop breeding,” said Deeming, and added rudely, “tell me,
Gramps, is it worth it?”

“In all kindness,” beamed the Angel, “I do believe you should have three
of your teeth knocked down your throat, to guard you against making such
remarks in the presence of someone who might take it less kindly than I
do.”

“I withdraw the remark,” said Deeming, bowing low; and when he
straightened up his face was puckered up like that of a child wanting to
cry but hanging on tight. “I have to make gags about it, sir. Can’t you
see that? Or I—I …”

“All right, boy. Don’t let it worry you … it’s a big thing to meet
without warning. D’ye think I’ve forgotten that?”

They stood for a while in companionable silence. Then, “How long do I
have to make up my mind?”

“As much time as it takes. You’ve qualified, you understand that? Your
invitation is permanent. You can only lose it by breaking faith with
me.”

“I can’t see myself starting a movement to persuade people to hate each
other. Not after this. And I’m not likely to talk. Who’d listen?”

“An Angel,” said the golden one softly, “no matter whom you were talking
to. Now—what do you want to do?”

“I want to go back to Earth.”

The Angel waved at the boat. “Help yourself.”

Deeming looked at him and bit his lip. “Don’t you want to know why?”

The Angel silently smiled.

“It’s just that I have to,” blurted Deeming protestingly. “I mean, all
my damn miserable years I’ve been afraid to live more than half a life
at a time. Even when I created a new one, for kicks, I shut off the
original while it was going on. I want to go back the way I am, and
learn how to be as big as I am.” He leaned forward and tapped the
Angel’s broad chest. “That—is—pretty damn big. If I let you make me into
what you are, I’d go back larger than life size. I want to be life size
for a time. I think that’s what I mean. You don’t have to be an Angel to
be big. You don’t have to be any more than a man to live by the word,
for that matter.” He fell silent.

“How do you know what it’s like to be what you call ‘life size’?”

“I did it for about three minutes, standing on the steps of the Astro
Central on Ybo. I was talking to …”

“You could go back by way of Ybo.”

“She wouldn’t look my way, except to have me arrested,” said Deeming.
“She saw me shoot an Angel.”

“Then we’ll have that same Angel arrest you, and restore her faith in
us.”

Deeming never reached Earth. He was arrested on Ybo and the arresting
Angel draped him over a thick forearm and displayed him to the girl
Tandy. She watched him stride off with his prisoner and ran after them.

“What are you going to do with him?”

“What would you do?”

They looked at each other for a time, until the Angel said to Deeming,
“Can you tell me honestly that you have something to learn from this
girl, and that you’re willing to learn it?”

“Oh yes,” said Deeming.

“Teach him what?” cried the girl, in a panic. “Teach him how?”

“By being yourself,” Deeming said, and when he said that the Angel let
go of him.

“Come see me,” the Angel said to Deeming, “three days after this is
over.”

It was over when she died and after they had lived together on Ybo for
seventy-four years, and in three days he was able to sit among his
great-grandchildren and decide what to do next.



A TOUCH OF STRANGE


He left his clothes in the car and slipped down to the beach.

Moonrise, she’d said.

He glanced at the eastern horizon and was informed of nothing. It was a
night to drink the very airglow, and the stars lay lightless like
scattered talc on the background.

“Moonrise,” he muttered.

Easy enough for her. Moonrise was something, in her cosmos, that one
simply knew about. He’d had to look it up. You don’t realize—certainly
_she’d_ never realize—how hard it is, when you don’t know anything about
it, to find out exactly what time moonrise is supposed to be, at the
dark of the moon. He still wasn’t positive, so he’d come early, and
would wait.

He shuffled down to the whispering water, finding it with ears and toes.
“Woo.” Catch m’ death, he thought. But it never occurred to him to keep
_her_ waiting. It wasn’t in her to understand human frailties.

He glanced once again at the sky, then waded in and gave himself to the
sea. It was chilly, but by the time he had taken ten of the fine strong
strokes which had first attracted her, he felt wonderful. He thought, oh
well, by the time I’ve learned to breathe under water, it should be no
trick at all to find moonrise without an almanac.

He struck out silently for the blackened and broken teeth of rock they
call Harpy’s Jaw, with their gums of foam and the floss of tide-risen
weed bitten up and hung for the birds to pick. It was oily calm
everywhere but by the Jaw, which mumbled and munched on every wave and
spit the pieces into the air. He was therefore very close before he
heard the singing. What with the surf and his concentration on flanking
the Jaw without cracking a kneecap the way he had that first time, he
was in deep water on the seaward side before he noticed the new quality
in the singing: Delighted, he trod water and listened to be sure; and
sure enough, he was right.

It sounded terrible.

“Get your flukes out of your mouth,” he bellowed joyfully, “you baggy
old guano-guzzler.”

“You don’t sound so hot yourself, chum,” came the shrill falsetto
answer, “and you know what type fish-gut chum I mean.”

He swam closer. Oh, this was fine. It wasn’t easy to find a forreal
something like this to clobber her with. Mostly, she was so darn
perfect, he had to make it up whole, like the time he told her her eyes
weren’t the same color. Imagine, he thought, _they_ get head-colds too!
And then he thought, well, why not? “You mind your big bony
bottom-feeding mouth,” he called cheerfully, “or I’ll curry your tail
with a scaling-tool.” He could barely make her out, sprawled on the
narrow seaward ledge—something piebald dark in the darkness. “Was that
really you singin’ or are you sitting on a blowfish?”

“You creak no better’n a straight-gut skua gull in a sewer sump,” she
cried raucously. “Whyn’cha swallow that seaslug or spit it out, one?”

“Ah, go soak your head in a paddlewheel,” he laughed. He got a hand on
the ledge and heaved himself out of the water. Instantly there was a
high-pitched squeak and a clumsy splash, and she was gone. The
particoloured mass of shadow-in-shade had passed him in mid-air too
swiftly for him to determine just what it was, but he knew with a
shocked certainty what it was not.

He wriggled a bare (i.e. mere) buttock-clutch on the short narrow shelf
of rock and leaned over as far as he could to peer into the
night-stained sea. In a moment there was a feeble commotion and then a
bleached oval so faint that he must avert his eyes two points to leeward
like a sailor seeing a far light, to make it out at all. Again, seeing
virtually nothing, he could be sure of the things it was not. That close
cap of darkness, night or no night, was not the web of floating gold for
which he had once bought a Florentine comb. Those two dim blotches were
not the luminous, over-long, wide-spaced (almost side-set) green eyes
which, laughing, devoured his sleep. Those hints of shoulders were not
broad and fair, but slender. That salt-spasmed weak sobbing cough was
unlike any sound he had heard on these rocks before; and the (by this
time) unnecessary final proof was the narrow hand he reached for and
grasped. It was delicate, not splayed; it was unwebbed; its smoothness
was that of the plum and not the articulated magic of a fine wrought
golden watchband. It was, in short, human, and for a long devastated
moment their hands clung together while their minds, in panic, prepared
to do battle with the truth.

At last they said in unison, “But you’re not …”

And let a wave pass, and chorused, “I didn’t know there was anybod …”

And opened and closed their mouths, and said together, “Y’see, I was
waiting for …” “Look!” he said abruptly, because he had found something
he could say that she couldn’t at the moment. “Get a good grip, I’ll
pull you out. Ready? One, two …”

“No!” she said, outraged, and pulled back abruptly. He lost her hand,
and down she went in mid-gasp, and up she came strangling. He reached
down to help, and missed, though he brushed her arm. “Don’t touch me!”
she cried, and doggy-paddled frantically to the rock on which he sat,
and got a hand on it. She hung there coughing until he stirred,
whereupon: “Don’t touch me!” she cried again.

“Well all right,” he said in an injured tone.

She said, aloud but obviously to herself, “Oh, _dear_ …”

Somehow this made him want to explain himself. “I only thought you
should come out, coughing like that, I mean it’s silly you should be
bobbing around in the water and I’m sitting up here on the …” He started
a sentence about he was only trying to be … and another about he was not
trying to be … and was unable to finish either. They stared at one
another, two panting sightless blots on a spume-slick rock.

“The way I was talking before, you’ve got to understand …”

They stopped as soon as they realized they were in chorus again. In a
sudden surge of understanding he laughed—it was like relief—and said,
“You mean that you’re not the kind of girl who talks the way you were
talking just before I got here. I believe you … And I’m not the kind of
guy who does it either. I thought you were a—thought you were someone
else, that’s all. Come on out. I won’t touch you.”

“Well …”

“I’m still waiting for the—for my friend. That’s all.”

“Well …”

A wave came and she took sudden advantage of it and surged upward,
falling across the ledge on her stomach. “I’ll manage, I’ll manage,” she
said rapidly, and did. He stayed where he was. They stayed where they
were in the hollow of the rock, out of the wind, four feet apart, in
darkness so absolute that the red of tight-closed eyes was a lightening.

She said, “Uh …” and then sat silently masticating something she wanted
to say, and swallowing versions of it. At last: “I’m not trying to be
nosy.”

“I didn’t think you … Nosy? You haven’t asked me anything.”

“I mean staying here,” she said primly. “I’m not just trying to be in
the way, I mean. I mean, I’m waiting for someone too.”

“Make yourself at home,” he said expansively, and then felt like a fool.
He was sure he had sounded cynical, sarcastic, and unbelieving. Her
protracted silence made it worse. It became unbearable. There was only
one thing he could think of to say, but he found himself unaccountably
reluctant to bring out into the open the only possible explanation for
her presence here. His mouth asked (as it were) while he wasn’t watching
it, inanely, “Is your uh friend coming out in uh a boat?”

“Is yours?” she asked shyly; and suddenly they were laughing together
like a brace of loons. It was one of those crazy sessions people will at
times find themselves conducting, laughing explosively, achingly,
without a specific punchline over which to hang the fabric of the
situation. When it had spent itself, they sat quietly. They had not
moved nor exchanged anything, and yet they now sat together, and not
merely side-by-side. The understood attachment to someone—something—else
had paradoxically dissolved a barrier between them.

It was she who took the plunge, exposed the Word, the code attachment by
which they might grasp and handle their preoccupation. She said,
dreamily, “I never saw a mermaid.”

And he responded, quite as dreamily but instantly too: “Beautiful.” And
that was question and answer. And when he said, “I never saw a …” she
said immediately, “Beautiful.” And that was reciprocity. They looked at
each other again in the dark and laughed, quietly this time.

After a friendly silence, she asked, “What’s her name?”

He snorted in self-surprise. “Why, I don’t know. I really don’t. When
I’m away from her I think of her as _she_, and when I’m with her she’s
just … _you_. Not you,” he added with a childish giggle.

She gave him back the giggle and then sobered reflectively. “Now that’s
the strangest thing. I don’t know his name either. I don’t even know if
they have names.”

“Maybe they don’t need them. She—uh—they’re sort of different, if you
know what I mean. I mean, they know things we don’t know, sort of … feel
them. Like if people are coming to the beach, long before they’re in
sight. And what the weather will be like, and where to sit behind a rock
on the bottom of the sea so a fish swims right into their hands.”

“And what time’s moonrise.”

“Yes,” he said, thinking, you suppose they know each other? you think
they’re out there in the dark watching? you suppose _he’ll_ come first,
and what will he say to me? Or what if _she_ comes first?

“I don’t think they need names,” the girl was saying. “They know one
person from another, or just who they’re talking about, by the feel of
it. What’s your name?”

“John Smith,” he said. “Honest to God.”

She was silent, and then suddenly giggled.

He made a questioning sound.

“I bet you say “Honest to God” like that every single time you tell
anyone your name. I bet you’ve said it thousands and thousands of
times,” she said.

“Well, yes. Nobody ever noticed it before, though.”

“I would. My name is Jane Dow. Dee owe doubleyou, not Doe.”

“Jane Dow. Oh! and you have to spell it out like that every single
time?”

“Honest to God,” she said, and they laughed.

He said, “John Smith, Jane Dow. Golly. Pretty ordinary people.”

“Ordinary. You and your mermaid.”

He wished he could see her face. He wondered if the merpeople were as
great a pressure on her as they were on him. He had never told a soul
about it—who’d listen?

Who’d believe? Or, listening, believing, who would not interfere? Such a
wonder … and had she told all her girlfriends and boyfriends and the
boss and what-not? He doubted it. He could not have said why, but he
doubted it.

“Ordinary,” he said assertively, “yes.” And he began to talk, really
talk about it because he had not, because he had to. “That has a whole
lot to do with it. Well, it has everything to do with it. Look, nothing
ever happened in my whole entire life. Know what I mean? I mean,
nothing. I never skipped a grade in school and I never got left back. I
never won a prize. I never broke a bone. I was never rich and never
hungry. I got a job and kept it and I won’t ever go very high in the
company and I won’t ever get canned. You know what I mean?”

“Oh, yes.”

“So then,” he said exultantly, “along comes this mermaid. I mean, to
_me_ comes a mermaid. Not just a glimpse, no maybe I did and maybe I
didn’t see a mermaid: this is a real live mermaid who wants me back
again, time and again, and makes dates and keeps ’em too, for all she’s
all the time late.”

“So is _he_,” she said in intense agreement.

“What I call it,” he said, leaning an inch closer and lowering his voice
confidentially, “is a touch of strange. A touch of strange. I mean,
that’s what I call it to myself, you see? I mean, a person is a person
all his life, he’s good to his mother, he never gets arrested, if he
drinks too much he doesn’t get in trouble he just gets, excuse the
expression, sick to his stomach. He does a day’s good work for a day’s
pay and nobody hates him or, for that matter, nobody likes him either.
Now a man like that has no _life;_ what I mean, he isn’t _real_. But
just take an ordinary guy-by-the-millions like that, and add a touch of
strange, you see? Some little something he does, or has, or that happens
to him, even once. Then for all the rest of his life he’s _real_. Golly.
I talk too much.”

“No you don’t. I think that’s real nice, Mr. Smith. A touch of strange.
A touch … you know, you just told the story of my life. Yes you did. I
was born and brought up and went to school and got a job all right there
in Springfield, and …”

“Springfield? You mean Springfield, Massachusetts? That’s my town!” he
blurted excitedly, and fell off the ledge into the sea. He came up
instantly and sprang up beside her, blowing like a manatee.

“Well no,” she said gently. “It was Springfield, Illinois.”

“Oh,” he said, deflated.

She went on, “I wasn’t ever a pretty girl, what you’d call, you know,
pretty. I wasn’t repulsive either, I don’t mean that. Well, when they
had the school dances in the gymnasium, and they told all the boys to go
one by one and choose a partner, I never got to be the first one. I was
never the last one left either, but sometimes I was afraid I’d be. I got
a job the day after I graduated from high school. Not a good one, but
not bad, and I still work there. I like some people more than other
people, but not very much, you know? … A touch of strange. I always knew
there was a name for the thing I never had, and you gave it a good one.
Thank you, Mr. Smith.”

“Oh that’s all right,” he said shyly. “And anyway, you have it now … how
was it you happened to meet your … him, I mean?”

“Oh, I was scared to _death_, I really was. It was the company picnic,
and I was swimming, and I—well, to tell you the actual truth, if you’ll
forgive me, Mr. Smith, I had a strap on my bathing suit that was, well,
slippy. Please, I don’t mean too _bad_, you know, or I wouldn’t ever
have worn it. But I was uncomfortable about it, and I just slipped
around the rocks here to fix it and … there he was.”

“In the daytime?”

“With the sun on him. It was like … like … There’s nothing it was like.
He was just lying here on this very rock, out of the water. Like he was
waiting for me. He didn’t try to get away or look surprised or anything,
just lay there smiling. Waiting. He has a beautiful soft big voice and
the longest green eyes, and long golden hair.”

“Yes, yes. _She_ has, too.”

“He was so beautiful. And then all the rest, well, I don’t have to tell
you. Shiny silver scales and the big curvy flippers.”

“Oh,” said John Smith.

“I was scared, oh yes. But not _afraid_. He didn’t try to come near me
and I sort of knew he couldn’t ever hurt me … and then he spoke to me,
and I promised to come back again, and I did, a lot, and that’s the
story.” She touched his shoulder gently and embarrassedly snatched her
hand away. “I never told anyone before. Not a single living soul,” she
whispered. “I’m so glad to be able to talk about it.”

“Yeah.” He felt insanely pleased. “Yeah.”

“How did you …”

He laughed. “Well, I have to sort of tell something on myself: This
swimming, it’s the only thing I was ever any good at, only I never found
out until I was grown. I mean, we had no swimming pools and all that
when I went to school. So I never show off about it or anything. I just
swim when there’s nobody around much. And I came here one day, it was in
the evening in summer when most everyone had gone home to dinner, and I
swam past the reef line, way out away from the Jaw, here. And there’s a
place there where it’s only a couple of feet deep and I hit my knee.”

Jane Dow inhaled with a sharp sympathetic hiss.

Smith chuckled. “Now I’m not one for bad language. I mean I never feel
right about using it. But you hear it all the time, and I guess it
sticks without you knowing it. So sometimes when I’m by myself and bump
my head or whatnot I hear this rough talk, you know, and I suddenly
realize it’s me doing it. And that’s what happened this day, when I hurt
my knee. I mean, I really hurt it: So I sort of scrounched down holding
on to my knee and I like to boil up the water for a yard around with
what I said. I didn’t know anyone was around or I’d never.”

“And all of a sudden there she was, laughing at me. She came porpoising
up out of deep water to seaward of the reef and jumped up into that
sunlight, the sun was low then, and red; and she fell flat on her back
loud as your tooth breaking on a cherry-pip. When she hit, the water
rose up all around her, and for that one second she lay in it like
something in a jewel box, you know, pink satin all around and her deep
in it.”

“I was that hurt and confused and startled I couldn’t believe what I
saw, and I remember thinking this was some la … I mean, woman, girl like
you hear about, living the life and bathing in the altogether. And I
turned my back on her to show her what I thought of that kind of
goings-on, but looking over my shoulder to see if she got the message,
and I thought then I’d made it all up, because there was nothing there
but her suds where she splashed, and they disappeared before I really
saw them.”

“About then my knee gave another twinge and I looked dawn and saw it
wasn’t just bumped, it was cut too and bleeding all down my leg, and
only when I heard her laughing louder than I was cussing did I realize
what I was saying. She swam round and round me, laughing, but you know?
there’s a way of laughing _at_ and a way of laughing _with_, and there
was no bad feeling in what she was doing.”

“So I forgot my knee altogether and began to swim, and I think she liked
that; she stopped laughing and began to sing, and it was …”

Smith was quiet for a time, and Jane Dow had nothing to say. It was as
if she were listening for that singing, or to it.

“She can sing with anything that moves, if it’s alive, or even if it
isn’t alive, if it’s big enough, like a storm wind or neaptide rollers.
The way she sang, it was to my arms stroking the water and my hands
cutting it, and me in it, and being scared and wondering, the way I
was … and the water on me, and the blood from my knee, it was all what
she was singing, and before I knew it it was all the other way round,
and I was swimming to what she sang. I think I never swam in my life the
way I did then, and may never again, I don’t know; because there’s a way
of moving where every twitch and wiggle is exactly right, and does twice
what it could do before; there isn’t a thing in you fighting anything
else of yours …” His voice trailed off.

Jane Dow sighed.

He said, “She went for the rocks like a torpedo and just where she had
to bash her brains out, she churned up a fountain of white-water and
shot out of the top of it and up on the rocks—right where she wanted to
be and not breathing hard at all. She reached her hand into a crack
without stretching and took out a big old comb and began running it
through her hair, still humming that music and smiling at me like—well,
just the way you said _he_ did, waiting, not ready to run. I swam to the
rocks and climbed up and sat down near her, the way she wanted.”

Jane Dow spoke after a time, shyly, but quite obviously from a
conviction that in his silence Smith had spent quite enough time on
these remembered rocks. “What … did she want, Mr. Smith?”

Smith laughed.

“Oh,” she said. “I do beg your pardon. I shouldn’t have asked.”

“Oh please,” he said quickly, “it’s all right. What I was laughing about
was that she should pick on me—me of all people in the world …” He
stopped again, and shook his head invisibly. No, I’m not going to tell
her about that, he decided. Whatever she thinks about me is bad enough.
Sitting on a rock half the night with a mermaid, teaching her to
cuss … He said, “They have a way of getting you to do what they want.”

It is possible, Smith found, even while surf whispers virtually
underfoot, to detect the cessation of someone’s breathing; to be
curious, wondering, alarmed, then relieved as it begins again, all
without hearing it or seeing anything. _What’d I say?_ he thought,
perplexed; but he could not recall exactly, except to be sure he had
begun to describe the scene with the mermaid on the rocks, and had then
decided against it and said something or other else instead. Oh.
Pleasing the mermaid. “When you come right down to it,” he said,
“they’re not hard to please. Once you understand what they want.”

“Oh yes,” she said in a controlled tone. “I found that out.”

“You did?”

Enough silence for a nod from her.

He wondered what pleased a merman. He knew nothing about them—nothing.
His mermaid liked to sing and to be listened to, to be watched, to comb
her hair, and to be cussed at. “And whatever it is, it’s worth doing,”
he added, “because when they’re happy, they’re happy up to the sky.”

“Whatever it is,” she said, disagreeably agreeing.

A strange corrosive thought drifted against his consciousness. He batted
it away before he could identify it. It was strange, and corrosive,
because of his knowledge of and feeling for, his mermaid. There is a
popular conception of what joy with a mermaid might be, and he had
shared it—if he had thought of mermaids at all—with the populace … up
until the day he met one. You listen to mermaids, watch them, give them
little presents, cuss at them, and perhaps learn certain dexterities
unknown, or forgotten, to most of us, like breathing under water—or, to
be more accurate, storing more oxygen than you thought you could, and
finding still more (however little) extractable from small amounts of
water admitted to your lungs and vaporized by practiced contractions of
the diaphragm, whereby some of the dissolved oxygen could be coaxed out
of the vapor. Or so Smith had theorized after practicing certain of the
mermaid’s ritual exercises. And then there was fishing to be eating, and
fishing to be fishing, and hypnotizing eels, and other innocent
pleasures.

But innocent.

For your mermaid is as oviparous as a carp, though rather more mammalian
than an echidna. Her eggs are tiny, by honored mammalian precedent, and
in their season are placed in their glittering clusters (for each egg
looks like a tiny pearl embedded in a miniature moonstone) in secret,
guarded grottos, and cared for with much ritual. One of the rituals
takes place after the eggs are well rafted and have plated themselves to
the inner lip of their hidden nest; and this is the finding and courting
of a merman to come and, in the only way he can, father the eggs.

This embryological sequence, unusual though it may be, is hardly unique
in complexity in a world which contains such marvels as the pelagic
phalange of the cephalopods and the simultaneity of disparate appetites
exhibited by certain arachnids. Suffice it to say, regarding mermaids,
that the legendary monosyllable of greeting used by the ribald Indian is
answered herewith; and since design follows function in such matters,
one has a guide to one’s conduct with the lovely creatures, and they,
brother, with you, and with you, sister.

“So gentle,” Jane Dow was saying, “but then, so rough.”

“Oh?” said Smith. The corrosive thought nudged at him. He flung it
somewhere else, and it nudged him there, too.… It was at one time the
custom in the Old South to quiet babies by smearing their hands
liberally with molasses and giving them a chicken feather. Smith’s
corrosive thought behaved like such a feather, and pass it about as he
would he could not put it down.

The mer_man_ now, he thought wildly … “I suppose,” said Jane Dow, “I
really am in no position to criticize.”

Smith was too busy with his figurative feather to answer.

“The way I talked to you when I thought you were … when you came out
here. Why, I never in my life …”

“That’s all right. You heard _me_, didn’t you?” Oh, he thought, suddenly
disgusted with himself, it’s the same way with her and her friend as it
is with me and mine. Smith, you have an evil mind. This is a nice girl,
this Jane Dow.

It never occurred to him to wonder what was going through her mind. Not
for a moment did he imagine that she might have less information on
mermaids than he had, even while he yearned for more information on
mermen.

“They _make_ you do it,” she said. “You just have to. I admit it; I lie
awake nights thinking up new nasty names to call him. It makes him so
happy. And he loves to do it too. The … things he says. He calls me
‘alligator bait.’ He says I’m his squashy little bucket of roe. Isn’t
that awful? He says I’m a milt-and-water type. What’s milt, Mr. Smith?”

“I can’t say,” hoarsely said Smith, who couldn’t, making a silent
resolution not to look it up. He found himself getting very upset. She
seemed like such a nice girl … He found himself getting angry. She
unquestionably _had_ been a nice girl.

Monster, he thought redly. “I wonder if it’s moonrise yet.”

Surprisingly she said, “Oh dear. Moonrise.”

Smith did not know why, but for the first time since he had come to the
rock, he felt cold. He looked unhappily seaward. A ragged, wistful,
handled phrase blew by his consciousness: _save her from herself_. It
made him feel unaccountably noble.

She said faintly, “Are you … have you … I mean, if you don’t mind my
asking, you don’t have to tell me …”

“What is it?” he asked gently, moving close to her. She was huddled
unhappily on the edge of the shelf. She didn’t turn to him, but she
didn’t move away.

“Married, or anything?” she whispered.

“Oh gosh no. Never. I suppose I had hopes once or twice, but no, oh gosh
no.”

“Why not?”

“I never met a … well, they all … You remember what I said about a touch
of strange?”

“Yes, yes …”

“Nobody had it … Then I got it, and … put it this way, I never met a
girl I could tell about the mermaid.”

The remark stretched itself and lay down comfortably across their laps,
warm and increasingly audible, while they sat and regarded it. When he
was used to it, he bent his head and turned his face towards where he
imagined hers must be, hoping for some glint of expression. He found his
lips resting on hers. Not pressing, not cowering. He was still, at first
from astonishment, and then in bliss. She sat up straight with her arms
braced behind her and her eyes wide until his mouth slid away from hers.
It was a very gentle thing.

Mermaids love to kiss. They think it excruciatingly funny. So Smith knew
what it was like to kiss one. He was thinking about that while his lips
lay still and sweetly on those of Jane Dow. He was thinking that the
mermaid’s lips were not only cold, but dry and not completely flexible,
like the carapace of the soft-shell crab. The mermaid’s tongue, suited
to the eviction of whelk and the scything of kelp, could draw blood. (It
never had, but it could.) And her breath smelt of fish.

He said, when he could, “What were you thinking?”

She answered, but he could not hear her.

“What?”

She murmured into his shoulder, “His teeth all point inwards.”

Aha, he thought.

“John,” she said suddenly, desperately, “There’s one thing you must know
now and forever more. I know just how things were between you and _her_,
but what you have to understand is that it wasn’t the same with me. I
want you to know the truth right from the very beginning, and now we
don’t need to wonder about it or talk about it ever again.”

“Oh you’re fine,” John Smith choked. “So fine … Let’s go. Let’s get out
of here before—before moonrise.”

Strange how she fell into the wrong and would never know it (for they
never discussed it again), and forgave him and drew from that a
mightiness; for had she not defeated the most lawless, the loveliest of
rivals?

Strange how he fell into the wrong and forgave her, and drew from his
forgiveness a lasting pride and a deep certainty of her eternal
gratitude.

Strange how the moon had risen long before they left, yet the mermaid
and the merman never came at all, feeling things as they strangely do.

And John swam in the dark sea slowly, solicitous, and Jane swam, and
they separated on the dark beach and dressed, and met again at John’s
car, and went to the lights where they saw each other at last; and when
it was time, they fell well and truly in love, and surely that is the
strangest touch of all.



THE COMEDIAN’S CHILDREN


The quiet third of the Twenty-First Century came to an end at ten
o’clock on the morning of May 17, 2034, with the return to earth of a
modified Fafnir space cruiser under the command of Capt. Avery Swope.
Perhaps in an earlier or a later day, the visitation which began on the
above date might have had less effect. But the earth was lulled and
content with itself, and for good reason—international rivalries having
reverted to the football fields and tennis courts, an intelligent
balance of trade and redistribution of agriculture and industry having
been achieved.

Captain Swope’s mission was to accomplish the twelfth off-earth
touchdown, and the body on which he touched was Iapetus (sometimes
Japetus), the remarkable eighth satellite of Saturn. All Saturn’s
satellites are remarkable, each for a different reason. Iapetus’ claim
to fame is his fluctuating brilliance; he always swings brightly around
the eastern limb of the ringed planet, and dwindles dimly behind the
western edge. Obviously the little moon is half bright and half dark,
and keeps one face turned always to its parent; but why should a moon be
half bright and half dark?

It was an intriguing mystery, and it had become the fashion to affect
all sorts of decorations which mimicked the fluctuations of the
inconstant moonlet: cufflinks and tunic clasps which dimmed and
brightened, bread-wrappers and book-jackets in dichotomous motley.
Copies were reproduced of the midcentury master Pederson’s magnificent
oil painting of a space ship aground on one of Saturn’s moons, with four
suited figures alighting, and it became a sort of colophon for news
stories about Swope’s achievement and window displays of bi-colored
gimcrackery—with everyone marveling at the Twentieth Century artist’s
unerring prediction of a Fafnir’s contours, and no one noticing that the
painting could not possibly have been of Iapetus which has no blue sky
nor weathered rocks, but must certainly have been the meticulous
Pederson’s visualization of Titan. Still, everyone thought it was
Iapetus, and since it gave no evidence as to why Iapetus changed its
brightness, the public embraced the painting as the portrait of a
mystery. They told each other that Swope would find out.

Captain Swope found out, but Captain Swope did not tell. Something
happened to his Fafnir on Iapetus. His signals were faintly heard
through the roar of an electrical disturbance on the parent world, and
they were unreadable, and they were the last. Then, voiceless, he
returned, took up his braking orbit, and at last came screaming down out
of the black into and through the springtime blue. His acquisition of
the tail-down attitude so very high—over fifty miles—proved that
something was badly wrong. The extreme deliberation with which he came
in over White Sands, and the constant yawing, like that of a baseball
bat balanced on a fingertip, gave final proof that he was attempting a
landing under manual control, something never before attempted with
anything the size of a Fafnir. It was superbly done, and may never be
equaled, that roaring drift down and down through the miles, over
forty-six of them, and never a yaw that the sensitive hands could not
compensate, until that last one.

What happened? Did some devil-imp of wind, scampering runt of a
hurricane, shoulder against the Fafnir? Or was the tension and strain at
last too much for weary muscles which could not, even for a split
second, relax and pass the controls to another pair of hands? Whatever
it was, it happened at three and six-tenths miles, and she lay over
bellowing as her pilot made a last desperate attempt to gain some
altitude and perhaps another try.

She gained nothing, she lost a bit, hurtling like a dirigible gone mad,
faster and faster, hoping to kick the curve of the earth down and away
from her, until, over Arkansas, the forward section of the rocket
liner—the one which is mostly inside the ship—disintegrated and she blew
off her tail. She turned twice end over end and thundered into a
buckwheat field.

Two days afterwards a photographer got a miraculous picture. It was
darkly whispered later that he had unforgivably carried the child—the
three-year-old Tresak girl from the farm two miles away—into the crash
area and had inexcusably posed her there; but this could never be
proved, and anyway, how could he have known? Nevertheless, the multiple
miracles of a momentary absence of anything at all in the wide clear
background, of the shadows which mantled her and of the glitter of the
many-sharded metal scrap which reared up behind her to give her a crown
but most of all the miracle of the child herself, black-eyed,
golden-haired, trusting, fearless, one tender hand resting on some
jagged steel which would surely shred her flesh if she were less
beautiful—these made one of the decade’s most memorable pictures. In a
day she was known to the nation, and warmly loved as a sort of infant
phoenix rising from the disaster of the roaring bird; the death of the
magnificent Swope could not cut the nation quite as painfully because of
her, as that cruel ruin could not cut her hand.

The news, then, that on the third day after her contact with the wreck
of the ship from Iapetus, the Tresak child had fallen ill of a
disfiguring malady never before seen on earth, struck the nation and the
world a dreadful and terrifying blow. At first there was only a
numbness, but at the appearance of the second, and immediately the third
cases of the disease, humanity sprang into action. The first thing it
did was to pass seven Acts, an Executive Order and three Conventions
against any further off-earth touchdowns; so, until the end of the
iapetitis epidemic, there was an end to all but orbital space flight.

“You’re going to be all right,” she whispered, and bent to kiss the
solemn, comic little face. (They said it wasn’t contagious; at least,
adults didn’t get it.) She straightened up and smiled at him, and Billy
smiled his half-smile—it was the left half—in response. He said
something to her, but by now his words were so blurred that she failed
to catch them. She couldn’t bear to have him repeat whatever it was; he
seemed always so puzzled when people did not understand him, as if he
could hear himself quite plainly. So to spare herself the pathetic
pucker which would worry the dark half of his face, she only smiled the
more and said again, “You’re going to be all right,” and then she fled.
Outside in the corridor she leaned for a moment against the wall and got
rid of the smile, the rigid difficult hypocrisy of that smile. There was
something standing there on the other side of the scalding blur which
replaced the smile; she said, because she had to say it to someone just
then: “How could I promise him that?”

“One does,” said the man, answering. She shook away the blur and saw
that it was Dr. Otis. “I promised him the same thing myself. One
just … does,” he shrugged. “Heri Gonza promises them, too.”

“I saw that,” she nodded. “He seems to wonder ‘How could I?’ too.”

“He does what he can,” said the doctor, indicating, with a motion of his
head, the special hospital wing in which they stood, the row of doors
behind and beyond, doors to laboratories doors to research and computer
rooms, store rooms, staff rooms, all donated by the comedian. “In a way
he has more right to make a promise like that than Billy’s doctor.”

“Or Billy’s sister,” she agreed tremulously. She turned to walk down the
corridor, and the doctor walked with her. “Any new cases?”

“Two.”

She shuddered. “Any …”

“No,” he said quickly, “no deaths.” And as if to change the subject, he
said, “I understand you’re to be congratulated.”

“What? Oh,” she said wrenching her mind away from the image of Billy’s
face, half marble, half mobile mahogany. “Oh, the award. Yes, they
called me this afternoon. Thank you. Somehow it … doesn’t mean very much
right now.”

They stood before his office at the head of the corridor. “I think I
understand how you feel,” he said. “You’d trade it in a minute for …” he
nodded down the corridor toward the boy’s room.

“I’d even trade it for a reasonable hope,” she agreed. “Good night,
doctor. You’ll call me?”

“I’ll call you if anything happens. Including anything good. Don’t
forget that, will you? I’d hate to have you afraid of the sound of my
voice.”

“Thank you, Doctor.”

“Stay away from the trideo this once. You need some sleep.”

“Oh Lord. Tonight’s the big effort,” she remembered.

“Stay away from it,” he said with warm severity. “You don’t need to be
reminded of iapetitis, or be persuaded to help.”

“You sound like Dr. Horowitz.”

His smile clicked off. She had meant it as a mild pleasantry; if she had
been less tired, less distraught, she would have had better sense.
Better taste. Horowitz’ name echoed in these of all halls like a
blasphemy. Once honored as among the greatest of medical researchers, he
had inexplicably turned his back on Heri Gonza and his Foundation, had
flatly refused research grants, and had publicly insulted the comedian
and his great philanthropy. As a result he had lost his reappointment to
the directorship of the Research Institute and a good deal of his
professional standing. And like the sullen buffoon he was, he plunged
into research—“real research,” he inexcusably called it—on iapetitis,
attempting single-handedly not only to duplicate the work of the
Foundation, but to surpass it: “the only way I know,” he had told a
reporter, “to pull the pasture out from under that clod and his trained
sheep.” Heri Gonza’s reply was typical: by deft sketches on his
programs, he turned Horowitz into an improper noun, defining a horowitz
as a sort of sad sack or poor soul, pathetic, mildly despicable,
incompetent and always funny—the kind of subhuman who not only asks for,
but justly deserves a pie in the face. He backed this up with a widely
publicized standing offer to Dr. Horowitz of a no-strings-attached
research grant of half a million; which Dr. Horowitz, after his first
unprintable refusal (his instructions to the comedian as to what he
could do with the money were preceded by the suggestion that he first
change it into pennies), ignored.

Therefore the remark, even by a Nobel prizewinner, even by a reasonably
handsome woman understandably weary and upset, even by one whose young
brother lay helpless in the disfiguring grip of an incurable
disease—such a remark could hardly be forgiven, especially when made to
the head of the Iapetitis Wing of the Medical Center and local chairman
of the Foundation. “I’m sorry, Dr. Otis,” she said. “I … probably need
sleep more than I realized.”

“You probably do, Dr. Barran,” he said evenly, and went into his office
and closed the door.

“Damn,” said Iris Barran, and went home.

No one knew precisely how Heri Gonza had run across the idea of an
endurance contest cum public solicitation of funds, or when he decided
to include it in his bag of tricks. He did not invent the idea; it was a
phenomenon of early broadcasting, which erupted briefly on the marriage
of video with audio in a primitive device known as _television_. The
performances, consisting of up to forty continuous hours of
entertainment interspersed with pleas for aid for one charity or
another, were headed by a single celebrity who acted as master of
ceremonies and beggar-in-chief. The terminologically bastardized name
for this production was _telethon_, from the Greek root _tele_, to
carry, and the syllable _thon_, meaningless in itself but actually the
last syllable of the word marathon. The telethon, sensational at first,
had rapidly deteriorated, due to its use by numbers of greedy publicists
who, for the price of a phone call, could get large helpings of
publicity by pledging donations which, in many cases, they failed to
make, and the large percentage of the citizenry whose impulse to give
did not survive their telephoned promises. And besides, the novelty
passed, the public no longer watched. So for nearly eighty years there
were no telethons, and if there had been, a disease to hang on would
have been hard to find. Heart disease, cancer, multiple sclerosis,
muscular dystrophy—these, and certain other infirmities on which public
appeals had been based, had long since disappeared or were negligibly
present.

Now, however, there was iapetitis.

A disorder of the midbrain and central nervous system, it attacked
children between the ages of three and seven, affecting only one
hemisphere, with no statistical preference for either side. Its mental
effects were slight (which in its way was one of the most tragic aspects
of the disease) being limited to aphasia and sometimes a partial alexia.
It had more drastic effects on the motor system, however, and on the
entire cellular regeneration mechanisms of the affected side, which
would gradually solidify and become inert, immobile. The most
spectacular symptom was the superficial pigmentation. The immobilized
side turned white as bleached bone, the other increasingly dark,
beginning with a reddening and slowly going through the red-browns to a
chocolate in the latter stages. The division was exactly on the median
line, and the bicoloration proceeded the same way in all cases,
regardless of the original pigmentation.

There was no known cure.

There was no known treatment.

There was only the Foundation—Heri Gonza’s Foundation—and all it could
do was install expensive equipment and expensive people to operate
it … and hope. There was nothing anyone else could do which would not
merely duplicate the Foundation’s efforts, and besides, with one
exception the Foundation already had the top people in microbiology,
neurology, virology, internal medicine, and virtually every other
discipline which might have some bearing on the disease. There were, so
far, only 376 known cases, every one of which was in a Foundation
hospital.

Heri Gonza had been associated with the disease since the very
beginning, when he visited a children’s hospital and saw the appalling
appearance of the first case, little Linda Tresak of Arkansas. When four
more cases appeared in the Arkansas State Hospital after she was a
patient there for some months, Heri Gonza moved with characteristic
noise and velocity. Within forty-eight hours of his first knowledge of
the new cases, all five were ensconced in a specially vacated wing of
the Medical Center, and mobilization plans were distributed to centers
all over the world, so that new clinics could be set up and duplicate
facilities installed the instant the disease showed up. There were at
present forty-two such clinics. Each child had been picked up within
hours of the first appearance of symptoms, whisked to the hospital,
pampered, petted, and observed. No treatment. No cure. The white got
whiter, the dark got darker, the white side slowly immobilized, the dark
side grew darker but was otherwise unaffected; the speech difficulty
grew steadily (but extremely slowly) worse; the prognosis was always
negative. Negative by extrapolation: any organism in the throes of such
deterioration might survive for a long time, but must ultimately
succumb.

In a peaceful world, with economy stabilized, population growing but not
running wild any longer, iapetitis was big news. The biggest.

The telethon was, unlike its forebears, not aimed at the public pocket.
It was to serve rather as a whip to an already aware world, information
to the informed, aimed at earlier and earlier discovery and diagnosis.
It was one of the few directions left to medical research. The disease
was obviously contagious, but its transmission method was unknown. Some
child, somewhere, might be found early enough to display some signs of
the point of entry of the disease, something like a fleabite in spotted
fever, the mosquito puncture in malaria—some sign which might heal or
disappear soon after its occurrence. A faint hope, but it was a hope,
and there was little enough of that around.

So, before a wide grey backdrop bearing a forty-foot insignia in the
center, the head and shoulders of a crying child vividly done in half
silver, half mahogany, Heri Gonza opened his telethon.

Iris Barran got home well after it had started; she had rather
overstayed her hospital visit. She came in wearily and slumped on the
divan, thinking detachedly of Billy, thinking of Dr. Otis. The thought
of the doctor reminded her of her affront to him, and she felt a flash
of annoyance, first at herself for having done it, and immediately
another directed at him for being so touchy—and so unforgiving. At the
same time she recalled his advice to get some sleep, not to watch the
telethon; and in a sudden, almost childish burst of rebellion she
slapped the arm of the divan and brought the trideo to life.

The opposite wall of the room, twelve feet high, thirty feet long,
seemed to turn to smoke, which cleared to reveal an apparent extension
of the floor of the room, back and further back, to Heri Gonza’s great
grey backdrop. All around were the sounds, the smells, the pressure of
the presence of thousands of massed, rapt people. “… so I looked down
and there the horse had caught its silly hoof in my silly stirrup.
‘Horse,’ I says, ‘if you’re gettin’ on, I’m gettin’ off!’ ”

The laugh was a great soft booming explosion, as usual out of all
proportion to the quality of the witticism. Heri Gonza had that rarest
of comic skills, the ability to pyramid his effects, so that the mildest
of them seemed much funnier than it really was. It was mounted on a
rapidly-stacked structure of previous quips and jokes, each with its
little store of merriment and all merriment suppressed by the audience
for fear of missing not only the next joke, but the entire continuity.
When the pyramid was capped, the release was explosive. And yet in that
split instant between capper and explosion, he always managed to slip in
a clear three or four syllables, “On my way here—” or “When the
president—” or “Like the horowitz who—” which, repeated and completed
after the big laugh, turned out to be the base brick for the next
pyramid.

Watching his face during the big laughs—yocks, the knowledgeable
columnists and critics called them—had become a national pastime. Though
the contagion of laughter was in his voice and choice of phrase, he
played everything deadpan. A small, wiry man with swift nervous
movements, he had a face-by-the-million: anybody’s face. Its notable
characteristics were three: thin lips, masked eyes, impenetrable as
onyx, and astonishing jug-handle ears. His voice was totally flexible,
capable of almost any timbre, and with the falsetto he frequently
affected, his range was slightly over four octaves. He was an
accomplished ventriloquist, though he never used the talent with the
conventional dummy, but rather to interrupt himself with strange voices.
But it was his ordinary, unremarkable, almost immobile face which was
his audience’s preoccupation. His face never laughed, though in dialogue
his voice might. His voice could smile, too, even weep and his face did
not. But at the yock, if it was a big yock, a long one, his frozen
waiting face would twitch; the thin lips would fill out a trifle: he’s
going to smile, he’s going to smile! Sometimes, when the yock was
especially fulsome, his mouth actually would widen a trifle; but then it
was always time to go on, and, deadpan he would. What could it matter to
anyone whether or not one man in the world smiled? On the face of it,
nothing: yet millions of people, most of whom were unaware of it, bent
close to their trideo walls and peered raptly, waiting, waiting to see
him smile.

As a result, everyone who heard him, heard every word.

Iris found herself grateful, somehow—able to get right out of herself,
sweep in with that vast unseen crowd and leave herself, her worrying
self, her angry, weary, logical, Nobelprizewinning self asprawl on the
divan while she hung on and smiled, hung on and tittered, hung on and
exploded with the world.

He built, and he built, and the trideo cameras crept in on him until,
before she knew it, he was standing as close to the invisible wall as
belief would permit; and still he came closer, so that he seemed in the
room with her; and this was a pyramid higher than most, more swiftly and
more deftly built, so that the ultimate explosion could contain itself
not much longer, not a beat, not a second …

And he stopped in mid-sentence, mid-word, even, and, over at the left,
fell to one knee and held out his arms to the right. “Come on, honey,”
he said in a gentle, tear-checked purr.

From the right came a little girl, skipping. She was a beautiful little
girl, a picture-book little girl, with old-fashioned bouncing curls,
shiny black patent-leather shoes with straps, little white socks, a
pale-blue dress with a very wide, very short skirt.

But she wasn’t skipping, she was limping. She almost fell, and Heri was
there to catch her.

Holding her in his arms, while she looked trustingly up into his face,
he walked to center stage, turned, faced the audience. His eyes were on
her face; when he raised them abruptly to the audience, they were, by
some trick of the light (or of Heri Gonza) unnaturally bright.

And he stood, that’s all he did, for a time, stood there with the child
in his arms, while the pent-up laughter turned to frustrated annoyance,
directed first at the comedian, and slowly, slowly, with a rustle of
sighs, at the audience itself by the audience. Ah, to see such a thing
and be full of laughter: how awful I am.

I’m sorry. I’m sorry.

One little arm was white, one pink. Between the too-tiny socks and the
too-short skirt, the long thin legs were one white, one pink.

“ ‘This is little Koska,” he said after an age. The child smiled
suddenly at the sound of her name. He shifted her in his elbow so he
could stroke her hair. He said softly, “She’s a little Esthonian girl,
from the far north. She doesn’t speak very much English, so she won’t
mind if we talk about her.” A huskiness crept into his voice. “She came
to us only yesterday. Her mother is a good woman. She sent her to us the
minute she noticed.”

Silence again, then he turned the child so their faces were side by
side, looking straight into the audience. It was hard to see at first,
and then it became all too plain—the excessive pallor of the right side
of her face, the too-even flush on the left, and the sharp division
between them down the center.

“We’ll make you better,” he whispered. He said it again in a foreign
language, and the child brightened, smiled trustingly into his face,
kept her smile as she faced the audience again: and wasn’t the smile a
tiny bit wider on the pink side than on the white? You couldn’t tell …

“Help me,” said Heri Gonza. “Help her, and the others, help us. Find
these children, wherever in the world they might be, and call us. Pick
up any telephone in the world and say simply, I … F. That’s IF, the
Iapetitis Foundation. We treat them like little kings and queens. We
never cause them any distress. By trideo they are in constant touch with
their loved ones.” Suddenly, his voice rang. “The call you make may find
the child who teaches us what we need to know. Your call—yours!—may find
the cure for us.”

He knelt and set the child gently on her feet. He knelt holding her
hands, looking into her face. He said, “And whoever you are, wherever
you might be, you doctors, researchers, students, teachers … if anyone,
anywhere, has an inkling, an idea, a way to help, any way at all—then
call me. Call me now, call here—” He pointed upward and the block
letters and figures of the local telephone floated over his head—“and
tell me. I’ll answer you now, I’ll personally speak to anyone who can
help. Help, oh, help.”

The last word rang and rang in the air. The deep stage behind him slowly
darkened, leaving the two figures, the kneeling man and the little
golden girl, flooded with light. He released her hands and she turned
away from him, smiling timidly, and crossed the wide stage. It seemed to
take forever, and as she walked, very slightly she dragged her left
foot.

When she was gone, there was nothing left to look at but Heri Gonza. He
had not moved, but the lights had changed, making of him a luminous
silhouette against the endless black behind him … one kneeling man, a
light in the universal dark … hope … slowly fading, but there, still
there … no? Oh, there …

A sound of singing, the palest of pale blue stains in deep center. The
singing up, a powerful voice from the past, an ancient, all but
forgotten tape of one of the most moving renditions the world has ever
known, especially for such a moment as this: Mahalia Jackson singing
_The Lord’s Prayer_, with the benefit of such audio as had not been
dreamed of in her day … with a cool fresh scent, with inaudible
quasihypnotic emanations, with a whispering chorus a chorus of angels
might learn from.

Heri Gonza had not said, “Let us pray.” He would never do such a thing,
not on a global network. There was just the kneeling dimness, and the
blue glow far away in the black. And if at the very end the glow looked
to some like the sign of the cross, it might have been only a shrouded
figure raising its arms; and if this was benediction, surely it was in
the eye of the beholder. Whatever it was, no one who saw it completely
escaped its spell, or ever forgot it. Iris Barran, for one, exhausted to
begin with, heart and mind full to bursting with the tragedy of
iapetitis; Iris Barran was wrung out by the spectacle. All she could
think of was the last spoken word: _Help!_

She sprang to her phone and waved it active. With trembling fingers she
dialed the number which floated in her mind as it had on the trideo
wall, and to the composed young lady who appeared in her solido cave,
saying, “Trideo, C. A. O. Good evening,” she gasped, “Heri
Gonza—quickly.”

“One moment please,” said the vision, and disappeared, to be replaced
instantly by another, even more composed, even lovelier, who said, “I.F.
Telethon.”

“Heri Gonza.”

“Yes, of course. Your name?”

“I-Iris Barran. Dr. Iris Barran.”

The girl looked up sharply. “Not the …”

“Yes, I won the Nobel prize. Please—let me speak to Heri Gonza.”

“One moment please.”

The next one was a young man with curly hair, a bell-like baritone, and
an intensely interested face. He was Burcke of the network. He passed
her to a jovial little fat man with shrewd eyes who was with Continuity
Acceptance. Iris could have screamed out loud. But a worldwide appeal
for calls would jam lines and channels for hours, and obviously a
thorough screening process was essential. She was dimly aware that her
name and face, only today in all the news, had already carried her to
the top. Consciously, she thought of none of this; she held on and
drove; wanting only to help … _help …_ A snatch of the conversation she
had had with Dr. Otis drifted across her mind: _I guess you’d trade it
for_ … and then a heart-rending picture of Billy’s face, trying to smile
with half a mouth. _I’d trade it all for a reasonable hope_ … and
suddenly she was staring into the face of Heri Gonza. Reflexively she
glanced over her shoulder at the trideo wall; Heri Gonza was there too,
with a solidophone pillar in center stage, its back to the audience so
that only the comedian could see its cave. Light from it flickered on
his face.

“I’d know that face anywhere!” he said raspingly.

“Oh,” she said faintly, “Mr.… uh …” and then remembered that one of his
public affectations was never to permit anyone to call him Mister. She
said, “Heri Gonza, I … I’m Iris B-barran, and I—” She realized that her
voice could not be heard over the trideo. She was grateful for that.

He said, just as stridently, “I know who you are. I know the story of
your life too.” Switching to a comic quack, he said “So-o-o?”

“You know I just won the Nobel award. M-uh, Heri Gonza, I want to help,
more than anything in the world, I want to help. My brother has it.
W-would you like me to give the award money to you … I mean, to the
Foundation?”

She did not know what she expected in exchange for this stunning offer.
She had not thought that far ahead. What she did not expect was …

“You _what?_” he yelled, so loud she drew her head down, gracelessly,
turtle-like. “Listen, you, I got along without you before and I can get
along without you now. You’re getting from me, see, and I’m giving. What
you got I don’t want. I’m not up here to do _you_ no good. I tell you
what you got, you _got_ a wrong number, and you _are_, s-s-s-s-so,” he
hissed in a hilarious flatulent stutter, “s-s-so long.” And before she
could utter another sound he waved her off and her phone cave went
black.

Numb with shock, she slowly turned to the trideo wall, where Heri Gonza
was striding downstage to the audience. His expressionless face, his
gait, his posture, the inclination of his head, and his tone of voice
all added to an amused indignation, with perhaps a shade more anger than
mirth. He tossed a thumb at the phone and said, “Wits we got calling,
can you imagine? At a time like this. We, got dimwits, half wits, and …”
exactly the right pause; there was one bleat of laughter somewhere in
the audience and then a thousand voices to chorus with him—“horowitz!”

Iris sank back in the phone chair and covered her face, pressing so hard
against her tired eyes that she saw red speckles. For a time she was
shocked completely beyond thought, but at last she was able to move. She
rose heavily and went to the divan, arrested her hand as she was about
to click off the trideo. Heri Gonza was back at the stage phone, talking
eagerly to someone, his voice honey and gentleness. “Oh bless you,
brother, and thank you. You may have an idea there, so I tell you what
you do. You call the I.F. at Johannesburg and arrange a meeting with the
doctors there. They’ll listen … No, brother, collect of course.
What’s-amatta, brother, you broke? I got news for you, for you-ee are-ee
a-ee good-ee man-ee yes-ee indeedy-dee: you ain’ta broka no mo. A man
like you? I got a boy on the way this very minute with a bag o’ gold for
the likes of you brother … Oh now, don’t say thanks, you make me mad.
’Bye.”

He waved off, and turned to the audience to intone, “A man with an
idea—little one, big one, who knows? But it’s to help … so bless him.”

Thunderous applause. Iris let her hand finish the gesture and switched
off.

She went and washed her face, and that gave her strength enough to
shower and change. After that she could think almost normally.

How _could_ he?

She turned over impossible alternatives, explanations. His phone was a
dummy: he couldn’t see her, didn’t know who was on the phone. Or: it was
his way, of being funny, and she was too tired to understand.
Or … or … it was no use: it had really happened, he had known what he
was doing, he had a reason.

But what reason? Why? Why?

In her mind she again heard that roar from the audience: Horowitz. With
difficulty, because it still stung, she pieced together the conversation
and then, moving her forefinger toward her phone and the trideo, back
and forth, puzzled out what had gone out over the air and what had not.
Only then did she fully understand that Heri Gonza had done what he had
done to make it seem that his first call was from Dr. Horowitz. But if
he needed that particular gag at that time, why didn’t he fake it to a
dead phone? Why actually converse with her, cut her down like that?

And he hadn’t let her help. That was worse than any of the rudeness, the
insult. He wouldn’t let her help.

What to do? Making the gesture she had made had not been hard; having it
refused was more than she could bear. She must help; she would help. Now
of all times, with all this useless money coming to her; she didn’t need
it, and it might, it just might somehow help, and bring Billy back home.

Well then, expose Heri Gonza. Give him back some of his own humiliation.
Call in the newsmen, make a statement. Tell them what she had offered,
tell them just who was on the line. He’d _have_ to take the money, and
apologize to boot.

She stood up; she sat down again. No. He had known what he was doing. He
had known who she was; he must have a telltale on his phone to get
information on his callers from that screening committee. She knew a lot
about Heri Gonza. He seemed so wild, so impulsive; he was not. He ran
his many enterprises with a steel fist; he took care of his own money,
his own bookings. He did not make mistakes nor take chances. He had
refused her and the Foundation would refuse her: the Foundation _was_
Heri Gonza. He had his reasons, and if she had any defense at all
against what he had done, he would not have done it.

She wasn’t allowed to help.

Unless …

She suddenly ran to the phone. She dialed 5, and the cave lit up with
the floating word DIRECTORY. She dialed H, O, R, and touched the Slow
button until she had the Horowitzes. There were pathetically few of
them. Almost everyone named Horowitz had filed unlisted numbers: many
had gone so far as to change their names.

George Rehoboth Horowitz, she remembered.

He wasn’t listed.

She dialed Information and asked. The girl gave her a pitying smile and
told her the line was unlisted. And of course, it would be. If Dr.
Horowitz wasn’t the most hated man on earth, he was the next thing to
it. A listed phone would be useless to him, never silent.

“Has he screening service?” Iris asked suddenly.

“He has,” said the girl, company-polite as always, but now utterly cold.
Anyone who _knew_ that creature to speak to … “Your name, please?”

Iris told her, and added, “Please tell him it’s very important.”

The cave went dark but for the slowly rotating symbol of the phone
company, indicating that the operator was doing her job. Then a man’s
head appeared and looked her over for a moment, and then said, “Dr.
Barran?”

“Dr. Horowitz.”

She had not been aware of having formed any idea of the famous
(infamous?) Horowitz; yet she must have. His face seemed too gentle to
have issued those harsh rejoinders which the news attributed to him; yet
perhaps it was gentle enough to be taken for the fumbler, the fool so
many people thought he was. His eyes, in some inexplicable way, assured
her that his could not be clumsy hands. He wore old-fashioned exterior
spectacles; he was losing his hair; he was younger than she had thought,
and he was ugly. Crags are ugly, tree-trunks, the hawk’s pounce, the
bear’s foot, if beauty to you is all straight lines and silk. Iris
Barran was not repulsed by this kind of ugliness.

She, said, bluntly, “Are you doing any good with the disease?”

She did not specify: today, there was only one disease.

He said, in an odd way as if he had known her for a long time and could
judge how much she would understand, “I have it all from the top down to
the middle, and from the bottom up to about a third. In between—nothing,
and no way to get anything.”

“Can you go any further?”

“I don’t know,” he said candidly. “I can go on trying to find ways to go
further, and if I find a way, I can try to move along on it.”

“Would some money help?”

“It depends on whose it us.”

“Mine.”

He did not speak, but tilted his head a little to one side and looked at
her.

She said, “I won … I have some money coming in. A good deal of it.”

“I heard,” he said, and smiled. He seemed to have very strong teeth, not
white, not even, just spotless and perfect.

“It’s a good deal out of my field, your theoretical physics, and I don’t
understand it. I’m glad you got it. I really am. You earned it.”

She shook her head, denying it, and said, “I was surprised.”

“You shouldn’t have been. After ninety years of rather frightening
confusion, you’ve restored the concept of parity to science—” he
chuckled—“though hardly in the way anyone anticipated.”

She had not known that this was her accomplishment; she had never
thought of it in those terms. Her demonstration of gravitic flux was a
subtle matter to be communicated with wordless symbols, quite past
speech. Even to herself she had never made a conversational analog of
it; this man had, though, not only easily, but quite accurately.

She thought, if this isn’t his field, and he grasps it like that—just
how good must he be in his own? She said, “Can you use the money? Will
it help?”

“God,” he said devoutly, “can I use it.… As to whether it will help,
Doctor, I can’t answer that. It would help me go on. It may not make me
arrive. Why did you think of me?”

Would it hurt him to know? she asked herself, and answered, it would
hurt him if I were not honest. She said, “I offered it—to the
Foundation. They wouldn’t touch it. I don’t know why.”

“I do,” he said, and instantly held up his hand. “Not now,” he said,
checking her question. He reached somewhere off transmission and came up
with a card, on which was lettered, AUDIO TAPPED.

“Who …”

“The world,” he overrode her, “is full of clever amateurs. Tell me, why
are you willing to make such a sacrifice?”

“Oh—the money. It isn’t a sacrifice. I have enough: I don’t need it.
And—my baby brother. He has it.”

“I didn’t know,” he said, with compassion. He made a motion with his
hands. She did not understand. “What?”

He shook his head, touched his lips, and repeated the motion, beckoning,
at himself and the room behind him. Oh. Come where I am.

She nodded, but said only, “It’s been a great pleasure talking with you.
Perhaps I’ll see you soon.”

He turned over his card; obviously he had used it many times before. It
was a map of a section of the city. She recognized it readily, followed
his pointing finger, and nodded eagerly. He said, “I hope it is soon.”

She nodded again and rose, to indicate that she was on her way. He
smiled and waved off.

It was like a deserted city, or a decimated one; almost everyone was off
the streets, watching the telethon. The few people who were about all
hurried, as if they were out against their wills and anxious to get back
and miss as little as possible. It was known that he intended to go on
for at least thirty-six hours, and still they didn’t want to miss a
minute of him. Wonderful, wonderful, she thought, amazed (not for the
first time) at people—just people. Someone had once told her that she
was in mathematics because she was so apart from, amazed at, people. It
was possible. She was, she knew, very unskilled with people, and she
preferred the company of mathematics, which tried so hard to be
reasonable, and to say what was really meant …

She easily found the sporting-goods store he had pointed out on his map,
and stepped into the darkened entrance. She looked carefully around and
saw no one, then tried the door. It was locked, and she experienced a
flash of disappointment of an intensity that surprised her. But even as
she felt it, she heard a faint click, tried the door again, and felt it
open. She slid inside and closed it, and was gratified to hear it lock
again behind her,

Straight ahead a dim, concealed light flickered, enough to show her that
there was a clear aisle straight back through the store. When she was
almost to the rear wall, the light flickered again, to show her a door
at her right, deep in an ell. It clicked as she approached, and opened
without trouble. She mounted two flights of stairs, and on the top
landing stood Horowitz, his hands out. She took them gladly, and for a
wordless moment they stood like that, laughing silently, until he
released one of her hands and drew her into his place. He closed the
door carefully and then turned and leaned against it.

“Well!” he said. “I’m sorry about the cloak and dagger business.”

“It was very exciting.” She smiled. “Quite like a mystery story.”

“Come in, sit down,” he sand, leading the way. “You’ll have to excuse
the place. I have to do my own housekeeping, and I just don’t.” He took
a test-tube rack and a cracked bunsen tube from an easy chair and nodded
her into it. He had to make two circuits of the room before he found
somewhere to put them down. “Price of fame,” he said sardonically, and
sat down on a rope-tied stack of papers bearing the flapping label
_Proceedings of the Pan-American Microbiological Society_. “Where that
clown makes a joke of Horowitz, other fashionable people make a game of
Horowitz. A challenge. Track down Horowitz. Well, if they did, through
tapping my phone or following me home, that would satisfy them. Then I
would be another kind of challenge. Bother Horowitz. Break in and stir
up his lab with a stick. You know.”

She shuddered: “People are … are so …”

“Don’t say that, whatever it was,” said Horowitz. “We’re living in a
quiet time, Doctor, and we haven’t evolved too far away from our hunting
and tracking appetites. It probably hasn’t occurred to you that your
kind of math and my kind of biology are hunting and tracking too. Cut
away our science bump and we’d probably hunt with the pack too. A big
talent is only a means of hunting alone. A little skill is a means of
hunting alone some of the time.”

“But … why must they hunt you?”

“Why must you hunt gravitic phenomena?”

“To understand it.”

“Which means to end it as a mystery. Cut it down to your size. Conquer
it. You happen to be equipped with a rather rarefied type of reason, so
you call your conquest understanding. The next guy happens to be
equipped with fourteen inches of iron pipe and achieves his conquest
with it instead.”

“You’re amazing,” she said openly. “You love your enemies, like—”

“Love thine enemies as thyself. Don’t take any piece of that without
taking it all. How much I love people is a function off how much I love
Horowitz, and you haven’t asked me about that … Matter of fact, I
haven’t asked me about that and I don’t intend to. My God it’s good to
talk to somebody again. Do you want a drink?”

“No,” she said. “How much do you love Heri Gonza?”

He rose and hit his palm with his fist and sat down again, all his
gentleness folded away and put out of sight. “There’s the exception. You
can understand anything humanity does if you try, but you can’t
understand the inhumanity of a Heri Gonza. The difference is that he
knows what is evil and what isn’t and doesn’t care. I don’t mean any
numb by-rote moral knowledge learned at the mother’s knee, the kind that
afflicts your pipe-wielder a little between blows and a lot when he gets
his breath afterward. I mean a clear, analytical, extrapolative,
brilliantly intelligent knowledge of each act and each consequence.
Don’t underestimate that devil.”

“He … seems to … I mean, he does love children,” she said fatuously.

“Oh, come on now. He doesn’t spend a dime on his precious Foundation
that he wouldn’t have to give to the government in taxes. Don’t you
realize that? He doesn’t do a thing he doesn’t have to do, and he
doesn’t have to love those kids. He’s using those kids. He’s using the
filthiest affliction mankind has known for a long time just to keep
himself front and center.”

“But if the Foundation does find a cure, then he …”

“Now you’ve put your finger on the thing that nobody in the world but me
seems to understand—why I won’t work with the Foundation. Two good
reasons. First, I’m ’way ahead of them. I don’t need the Foundation and
all those fancy facilities. I’ve got closer to the nature of iapetitis
than any of ’em. Second, for all my love for and understanding of
people, I don’t want to find out what I’m afraid I would find out if I
worked there and if a cure was found.”

“You mean he’d—he’d withhold it?”

“Maybe not permanently. Maybe he’d sit on it until he’d milked it dry.
Years. Some would die by then. Some are pretty close as it is.”

She thought of Billy and bit her hand.

“I didn’t say he would do that,” Horowitz said, more gently. “I said I
don’t want to be in a position to find out. I don’t want to know that
any member of my species could do a thing like that. Now you see why I
work by myself, whatever it costs. If I can cure iapetitis, I’ll say so.
I’ll do it, I’ll prove it. That’s why I don’t mind his kind of cheap
persecution. If I succeed, all that harassment makes it impossible for
him to take credit or profit in any way.”

“Who are you going to cure?”

“What?”

“He’s got them all. He’s on trideo right now, a telethon, the biggest
show of the last ten years, hammering at people to send him every case
the instant it’s established.” Her eyes were round.

“The logician,” he whispered, as round-eyed as she. “Oh my God, I never
thought of that.” He took a turn around the room and sat down again. His
face was white. “But we don’t _know_ that. Surely he’d give me a
patient. Just one.”

“It might cost you the cure. You’d have to, you’d just _have_ to give it
to him, or you’d be the one withholding it!”

“I won’t think about it now,” he said hoarsely. “I can’t think about it
now. I’ll get the cure. That first.”

“Maybe my brother Billy …”

“Don’t even think about it!” he cried. “He’s already got it in for you.
Don’t get in his way any more. He won’t let your Billy out of there and
you know it. Try anything and he’ll squash you like a beetle.”

“What’s he got against me?”

“You don’t know? You’re a Nobel winner—one of the newsiest things there
is. A girl, and not bad-looking at all. You’re in the public eye, or you
will be by noon tomorrow when the reporters get to you. Do you think for
a minute he’d let you or anybody climb on his publicity? Listen,
iapetitis is his sole property, his monopoly, and he’s not going to
share it. What’d you expect him to do, announce the gift on his lousy
telethon?”

“I—I c-called him on his telethon.”

“You didn’t!”

“He pretended the call was from you. But … but at the same time he told
me … oh yes, he said, ‘What you got I don’t want. I’m not up here to do
you no good.’ ”

Horowitz spread his hands. “Q.E.D.”

“Oh,” she said, “how awful.”

At that point somebody kicked the door open.

Horowitz sprang to his feet, livid. A big man in an open, flapping
topcoat shouldered his way in. He had a long horseface and a blue jaw.
His eyes were extremely sad. He said, “Now just relax. Relax and you’ll
be all right.” His hands, as if they had a will of their own, busied
themselves about pulling off a tight left-hand glove with wires attached
to it and running into his side pocket.

“Flannel!” Horowitz barked. “How did you get in?” He stepped forward,
knees slightly bent, head lowering. “You’ll get out of here or so help
me …”

“No!” Iris cried, clutching at Horowitz’s forearm. The big man
outreached and outweighed the biologist, and certainly would fight
rougher and dirtier.

“Don’t worry, lady,” said the man called Flannel sleepily. He raised a
lazy right hand and made a slight motion with it, and a cone-nosed
needler glittered in his palm. “He’ll be good—won’t you, boy? Or I’ll
put you to bed for two weeks an’ a month over.”

He sidled past and, never taking his gaze from Horowitz for more than a
flickering instant, opened the three doors which led from the
laboratory—a bathroom, a bedroom, a storage closet.

“Who is he? You know him?” Iris whispered.

“I know him,” growled Horowitz. “He’s Heri Gonza’s bodyguard.”

“Nobody but the two of them,” said Flannel.

“Good,” said a new voice and a second man walked in, throwing off a
slouch hat and opening the twin to the long, loose topcoat Flannel wore.
“Hi, chillun,” said Heri Gonza.

There was a long silence, and then Horowitz plumped down on his pile of
_Proceedings_, put his chin in his hands; and said in profound disgust,
“Ah, for God’s sake.”

“Dr. Horowitz,” said Heri Gonza pleasantly, nodding, and “Dr. Barran.”

Iris said, shakily, “I th-thought you were doing a sh-show.”

“Oh, I am, I am. All things are possible if you only know how. At the
moment Chitsie Bombom is doing a monolog, and she’s good for two
encores. After that there’s a solido of me sitting way up on the flats
in the left rear, oh so whimsically announcing the Player’s Pub Players.
They have a long one-acter and a pantomime. I’ve even got a ballet
company, in case this takes that long.”

“Phoney to the eyeballs, even when you work,” said Horowitz. “Quickly
and quietly and get the hell out of here, ’scuse me, Dr. Barran.”

“Oh, that’s all right,” she murmured.

“Please,” said the comedian softly, “I didn’t come here to quarrel with
you. I want to end all that. Here and now, and for good.”

“We’ve got something he wants,” said Horowitz in a loud aside to Iris.

Heri Gonza closed his eyes and said, “You’re making this harder than it
has to be. What can I do to make this a peaceful talk?”

“For one thing,” said Horowitz, “your simian friend is breathing and it
bothers me. Make him stop.”

“Flannel,” said Heri Gonza, “get out.”

Glowering, the big man moved to the door, opened it, and stood on the
sill. “All the way,” said the comedian. Flannel’s broad back was one
silent mass of eloquent protest, but he went out and shut the door.

Deftly, with that surprising suddenness of nervous motion which was his
stock in trade, Heri Gonza dropped to one knee to bring their faces on a
level, and captured Iris’s startled hands. “First of all, Dr. Barran, I
came to apologize to you for the way I spoke on the telephone. I had to
do it—there was no alternative, as you’ll soon understand. I tried to
call you back, but you’d already gone.”

“You followed me here! Oh, Dr. Horowitz, I’m sorry!”

“I didn’t need to follow you. I’ve had this place spotted since two days
before you moved into it, Horowitz. But I’m sorry I had to strongarm my
way in.”

“I yield to curiosity,” said Horowitz. “Why didn’t my locks alarm when
you opened them? I saw Flannel’s palm-print eliminator, but dammit, they
should have alarmed.”

“The locks were here when you rented the place, right? Well, who do you
think had them installed? I’ll show you where the cutoff switch is
before I leave. Anyhow—grant me this point. Was there any other way I
could have gotten in to talk with you?”

“I concede,” said Horowitz sourly.

“Now, Dr. Barran. You have my apology, and you’ll have the explanation
to go with it. Believe me, I’m sorry. The other thing I want to do is to
accept, with thanks from the bottom of my heart, your very kind offer of
the prize money. I want it, I need it, and it will help more than you
can possibly realize.”

“No,” said Iris flatly. “I’ve promised it to Dr. Horowitz.”

Heri Gonza sighed, got to his feet, and leaned back against the lab
bench. He looked down at them sadly.

“Go on,” said Horowitz. “Tell us how you need money.”

“The only two things I have never expected from you are ignorance and
stupidity,” said Heri Gonza sharply, “and you’re putting up a fine
display of both. Do you really think, along with all my millions of
ardent fans, that when I land a two-million-dollar contract I somehow
put two million dollars in the bank? Don’t be childish. My operation is
literally too big to hide anything in. I have city, county, state and
federal tax vultures picking through my whole operational framework. I’m
a corporation and subject to outside accounting. I don’t even have a
salary; I draw what I need, and I damn well account for it, too. Now, if
I’m going to finish what I started with the disease, I’m going to need a
lot more money than I can whittle out a chip at a time.”

“Then take it out of the Foundation money—that’s what it’s for.”

“I want to do the one thing I’m not allowed to do with it. Which happens
to be the one thing that’ll break this horrible thing—it has to!”

“The only thing there is like that is a trip to Iapetus.”

To this, Heri Gonza said nothing—absolutely nothing at all. He simply
waited.

Iris Barran said, “He means it. I think he really means it.”

“You’re a big wheel,” said Horowitz at last, “and there are a lot of
corners you can cut, but not that one. There’s one thing the
government—all governments and all their armed forces—will rise up in
wrath to prevent, and that’s another landing and return from any place
off earth—especially, Iapetus. You’re got close to four hundred dying
kids on your hands right now, and the whole world is scared.”

“Set that aside for a moment.” The comedian was earnest, warm-voiced.
“Just suppose it could be done. Horowitz, as I understand it you have
everything you need on the iapetitis virus but one little link. Is that
right?”

“That’s right. I can synthesize a surrogate virus from nucleic acids and
exactly duplicate the disease. But it dies out of its own accord.
There’s a difference between my synthetic virus and the natural one, and
I don’t know what it is. Give me ten hours on Iapetus and half a break,
and I’ll have the original virus under an electron mike. Then I can
synthesize a duplicate, a real self-sustaining virus that can cause the
disease. Once I have that, the antigen becomes a factory process, with
the techniques we have today. We’ll have shots for those kids by the
barrel lot inside of a week.”

Heri Gonza spread his hands. “There’s the problem, then. The law won’t
allow the flight until we have the cure. We won’t have the cure unless
we make the flight.”

Iris said, “A Nobel prize is an awful lot of money, but it won’t buy the
shell of a space ship.”

“I’ve got the ship.”

For the first time Horowitz straightened up and, spoke with something
besides anger and hopelessness. “What kind of a ship? Where is it?”

“A Fafnir. You’ve seen it, or pictures of it. I use it for
globe-trotting mostly, and VIP sightseeing. It’s a deepspace craft, crew
of twelve, and twelve passenger cabins. But it handles like a dream, and
I’ve got the best pilot in the world. Kearsarge.”

“Kearsarge, God yes. But look, what you call deepspace is Mars and
Venus. Not Saturn.”

“You don’t know what’s been done to that ship. She’ll sleep four now. I
have a lab and a shop in her, and all the rest is nothing but
power-plant, shielding and fuel. Hell, she’ll make Pluto!”

“You mean you’ve been working on this already?”

“Man, I’ve been chipping away at my resources for a year and a half now.
You don’t know what kind of footsie I’ve been playing with my business
managers and the banks and all. I can’t squeak out another dime without
lighting up the whole project. Dr. Barran, now do you see why I had to
treat you like that? You were _the_ godsend, with your wonderful offer
and your vested interest in Billy. Can you astrogate?”

“I—oh dear. I know the principles well enough. Yes, I could; with a
little instruction.”

“You’ll get it. Now look, I don’t want to see that money. You two will
go down and inspect the ship tomorrow morning, and then put in
everything you’ll need beyond what’s already there. You’ve got food,
fuel, water and air enough for two trips, let alone one.”

“God,” said Horowitz.

“I’ll arrange for your astrogation, Dr. Barran. You’ll have to dream up
a story, secret project or long solitary vacation or some such.
Horowitz, you can drop out of sight without trouble.”

“Oh, sure, thanks to you.”

“Dammit, this time you’re welcome,” said the comedian, and very nearly
smiled. “Now, you’ll want one more crew member: I’ll take care of that
before flight time.”

“What about the ship? What will you say?”

“Flight test after overhaul. Breakdown in space, repair, return—some
such. Leave that to Kearsarge.”

“I freely admit,” said Horowitz, “that I don’t get it. This is one
frolic that isn’t coming out of taxes, and it’s costing you a packet.
What’s in it, mountebank?”

“You could ask that,” said the comedian, sadly. “The kids, that’s all.”

“You’ll get the credit?”

“I won’t, I can’t, I don’t want it. I can’t tie in to this jaunt—it
would ruin me. Off-earth landings, risking the lives of all earth’s
kids—you know how they’d talk. No sir: this is your cooky, Horowitz. You
disappear, you show up one day with the answer. I eat crow like a hell
of a good sport. You get back your directorship if you want it. Happy
ending. All the kids get well.” He jumped into the air and clicked his
heels four times on the way down. “The kids get well,” he breathed with
sudden sobriety.

Horowitz said gently, “Heri Gonza, what’s with you and kids?”

“I like ’em.” He buttoned his coat. “Goodnight, Dr. Barran. Please
accept my apologies again, and don’t think too badly of me.”

“I don’t,” she said smiling, and gave him her hand.

“But why do you like kids that much?” asked Horowitz.

Heri Gonza shrugged easily and laughed his deadpan laugh. “Never had
none,” he chuckled. He went to the door and stopped facing it, suddenly
immobile. His shoulders trembled. He whirled suddenly, and the famous
carven face was wet, twisted, the mouth tortured and crooked. “Never
can,” he whispered, and literally ran out of the room.

The weeks went by, the month. Iapetitis cases underwent some strange
undulations, and a hope arose that the off-world virus was losing its
strength. Some of the older cases actually improved, and a blessing that
was, too; for although overall growth was arrested, there was a tendency
for the mobile side to grow faster than the other, and during the
improvement phase, the sides seemed to equalize. Then, tragically the
improvement would slow; and stop.

Incidence of the disease seemed to be slackening as well. At the last,
there had been only three new cases in a year, though they caused a bad
flurry, occurring as they did simultaneously in a Belgian village which
had had no hint of the disease before.

Heri Gonza still did his weekly stint (less vacation) and still amazed
his gigantic audiences with his versatility, acting, singing, dancing,
clowning. Sometimes he would make quiet appearances, opening and closing
the show and turning it over to a theater or ballet group. During the
Old Timer’s Celebration he learned to fly a perfect duplicate of a
century-old light aircraft with an internal combustion engine, and
daringly took his first solo during the show, with a trideo camera
occupying the instructor’s seat.

At other times he might take up the entire time-segment alone, usually
with orchestra and props, once—possibly his most successful show—dressed
in sloppy practice clothes on a bare stage, without so much as a chair,
and with no assistance but lights and cameras and an occasional
invisible touch from the hypnos and the scent generators. Singlehandedly
he was a parade, a primary schoolroom, a zoo in an earthquake, and an
old lady telling three children, ages five, ten, and fifteen, about sex
all at the same time.

And in between (and sometimes during) his shows, he faithfully
maintained I. F. He visited his children regularly, every single one of
the more than four hundred. He thrilled with their improvements, cheered
them in their inevitable relapses. The only time he did not make one of
his scheduled shows at all was the time the three cases appeared in
Belgium, and then the slot was filled with news-items about the
terrifying resurgence, and a world tour of I. F. clinics. He was a great
man, a great comic, no question about it, right up to his very last
show.

He didn’t know it was his last show, which in its way was a pity,
because with that knowledge he would have been more than good; he’d have
been great. He was that kind of performer.

However, he was good, and was in and out of a vastly amusing variety
show, using his old trick of standing offstage and singing with perfect
mimicry while top vocalists stood center stage and mouthed the words. He
turned out to be one of the Japanese girls who built body-pyramids on
their bicycles, and, powered by a spring device under the water, joined
a succession of porpoises leaping to take fish out of a keeper’s hand.

He played, as he preferred to do, in a large studio without an audience,
but playing to the audience-response sound supplied to him. He made his
cues well, filled in smoothly with ad-libs when a girl singer ran a
chorus short on her arrangement, and did his easy stand-up comedy
monologue to close. A pity he didn’t smile on that show. When the on-the
airs went out and the worklights came on, he threw a sweat-shirt around
his shoulder and ambled into the wings, where, as usual, the network
man, Burcke, waited for him.

“How’d it look, Burckee ol’ turkey?”

“Like never before,” said Burcke.

“Aw, you’re cute yourself,” said the comedian. “Let’s have a look.” One
of his greatest delights—and one reason for his fantastic polish—was the
relaxed run-through afterward, where he lounged in the projection-room
and looked at the show he had just finished from beginning to end. He
and Burcke and a few interested cast members, backstage people, and
privileged strangers got arranged in the projection room. Beer was
passed around and the small-talk used up. As usual they all deferred to
Heri Gonza, and when he waved a negligent hand everybody shut up and the
projectionist threw the switch.

_Title and credits with moving cloud-blanket background. Credits fade,
camera zooms towards clouds, which thin to show mountain range. Down
through clouds, hover over huge misty lake. Water begins to heave, to be
turbulent, suddenly shores rush together and water squirts high through
the clouds in a thick column. Empty lake rises up out of clouds, is
discovered to be Heri Gonza’s open mouth. Pull back to show full face.
Puzzled expression. Hand up, into mouth, extracts live goldfish_.

GONZA: Welcome to the Heri Gonza show, this week “As you lake it.”
_(beat)_ Which is all you can expect when you open with a punorama. What
ho is _(beat)_ What ho is yonder? A mountain. What ho is on the
mountain? A mountain goat. What ho is the goat mountain? Why, another
moun—Fellers, keep the lens on me, things are gettin’ a little blue off
camera. Now hear ye, Tom, now hear ye Dick, now hear ye hairy Harry,
Heri’s here. Hee hee, ho ho, here comes the show.

_Soft focus and go to black. Long beat_.

Heri took his beer away from his mouth and glared at the wall. “God’s
sake, you send all that black?”

“Sure did,” said Burcke equably.

“Man, you don’t do that for anything but the second coming. What you
think they expect with all that black? It sucks ’em in, but boy, you got
to pay off.”

“We paid off,” said Burcke. “Here it comes.”

“The horse act, right?”

“Wrong,” said Burcke.

_Dark stage. Desk, pool of light. Zoom in, Burcke, jaw clamped. In a
face as sincere and interested as that, the clamped jaw is pretty grim_.

BURCKE: Tonight the Heri Gonza show brings you a true story. Although
the parts are played by professional actors, and certain scenes are
shortened for reasons of time, you may be assured that these are real
events and can be proved in every detail.

“What the hell is this?” roared Heri Gonza. “Did you air this? Is this
what went out when I was knocking myself out with that horse act?”

“Sit down,” said Burcke.

Heri Gonza sat down dazedly.

_Burcke at desk. Lifts book and raps it_.

BURCKE: This is a ship’s rough log, the log of the Fafnir 203. How it
comes to be on this desk, on your wall, is, I must warn you, a shocking
story. The Fafnir is a twelve-cabin luxury cruiser with a crew of
twelve, including stewards and the galley crew. So was the 203, before
it was rebuilt. It was redesigned to sleep four with no room over, with
two cabins rebuilt as a small-materials shop and a biological
laboratory, and all the rest taken up with powerplant, fuel and stores.
The ship’s complement was Dr. Iris Barran, mathematician—

_Fade in foredeck of Fafnir, girl standing by computer_.

Dr. George Rehoboth Horowitz, microbiologist—

_Bespectacled man enters, crosses to girl, who smiles_.

Yeager Kearsarge, pilot first class—

_Kearsarge is a midget with a long, bony, hardbitten face. He enters
from black foreground and goes to control console_.

Sam Flannel, supercargo—

_Widen lighting to pass cabin bulkhead, discovering large man strapped
in acceleration couch, asleep or unconscious_.

“I got it,” said Heri Gonza in the projection room. “A rib. It’s a rib.
Pretty good, fellers.”

“It isn’t a rib, Heri Gonza,” said Burcke. “Sit down, now.”

“It’s got to be a rib,” said Heri Gonza in a low voice. “Slip me a beer
I should relax and enjoy the altogether funny joke.”

“Here. Now shush.”

BURCKE: … mission totally contrary to law and regulation. Destination:
Iapetus. Purpose: collection of the virus, or spores, of the dreaded
children’s affliction iapetitis, on the theory that examination of these
in their natural habitat will reveal their exact internal structure and
lead to a cure, or at the very least an immunization. Shipowner and
director of mission: _(long beat)_ Heri Gonza.

Fourteen hours out.

_Fade Burcke and desk and take out. Dolly in to foredeck_.

_Horowitz crosses to side cabin, looks in on Flannel. Touches Flannel’s
face. Returns to computer and Iris_.

HOROWITZ: He’s still out cold. The tough boy is no spaceman.

IRIS: I can’t get over his being here at all. Why ever did Heri want him
along?

HOROWITZ: Maybe he’ll tell us.

_Small explosion. High whine_.

KEARSARGE: A rock! a rock!

IRIS: _(frightened)_ What’s a rock?

Kearsarge waddles rapidly to friction hooks on bulkhead, snatches off
helmets, throws two to Horowitz and Iris, sprints with two more into
cabin. Gets one on Flannel’s lolling head, adjusts oxygen valve. Puts on
his own. Returns to assist Iris, then Horowitz.

IRIS: What is it?

KEARSARGE: Nothing to worry you, lady. Meteorite. Just a little one.
I’ll get it patched.

_From control console, sudden sharp hiss and cloud of vapor_.

IRIS: Oh! And what’s _that?_

KEARSARGE: Now you got me.

_Kearsarge goes to console kneels, peers underneath. Grunts, fumbles_.

HOROWITZ: What is it?

KEARSARGE: Ain’t regulation, ’sall I know.

_Horowitz kneels beside him and peers_.

HOROWITZ: What’s this?

KEARSARGE: Bottom of main firing lever. Wire tired to it, pulled that
pin when we blasted off.

HOROWITZ: Started this timing mechanism … What time did it pop?

KEARSARGE: Just about 14:30 after blastoff.

HOROWITZ: Think you can get it off there? I’d like to test for what was
in it.

_Kearsarge gets the device off, gives it to Horowitz, who takes it into
lab_.

_Cut to cabin, closeup of Flannel’s helmeted face. He opens his eyes,
stares blankly. He is very sick, pale, insane with dormant fear.
Suddenly fear no longer dormant. With great difficulty raises head,
raises strapped-down wrist enough to see watch. Suddenly begins to
scream and thrash around. The releases are right by his hands but he
can’t find them. Iris and Kearsarge run in. Kearsarge stops to take in
the situation, then reaches out and pulls releases. Straps fall away;
Flannel, howling, leaps for the door, knocking the midget flat and
slamming Iris up against edge of door. She screams. Kearsarge scrambles
to his feet, takes off after Flannel like a Boston terrier after a bull.
Flannel skids to a stop by the lifeboat blister, starts tugging at it_.

KEARSARGE: What the hell are you doing?

FLANNEL _(blubbering):_ 14:30 … 14:30 … I gotta get out, gotta get
out … (screams)

KEARSARGE: Don’t pull on that, y’damn fool! That’s not the hatch, it’s
the release! We got spin on for gravity—you’ll pitch the boat a hundred
miles off!

FLANNEL: Oh, lemme out, it’s too late!

_Kearsarge punches upwards with both hands so unexpectedly that
Flannel’s grip is broken and he pitches over backwards. Kearsarge leaps
on him, twists his oxygen valve, and scuttles back out of the way,
Flannel staggers over to the boat blister, gets his hands on the wrong
lever again, but his knees buckle. Inside the helmet, his face is
purpling. Horowitz comes running out of the lab. Kearsarge puts out an
arm and holds him back, and together they watch Flannel sag down, fall,
roll, writhe. He puts both hands on helmet, tugs at it weakly_.

HOROWITZ: Don’t for God’s sakes let him take off that helmet!

KEARSARGE: Don’t worry. He can’t.

_Flannel slumps and lies still. Kearsarge goes to him and opens valve a
little. He beckons Horowitz and together they drag him back to the cabin
and with some difficulty get him on the couch and strapped down_.

HOROWITZ: What happened? I had my hands full of reagents in there,

KEARSARGE: Space nutty. They get like that sometimes after blackout. He
wanted out. Tried to take the boat.

HOROWITZ: He say anything?

KEARSARGE: Buncha junk. Said, 14:30, 14:30. Said it was too late, had to
get out.

HOROWITZ; That snivvy under the console popped at 14:30. He knew about
it.

KEARSARGE: Did he now. What was it?

HOROWITZ: Cyanide gas. If we hadn’t been holed and forced to put the
helmets on, we’d’ve had it.

KEARSARGE: Except him. He figured to be up an’ around lookin’ at his
watch, and when she popped, he’d be in the boat headed home and we’d
keep blasting till the pile run dry, som’res out t’ords Algol.

HOROWITZ: Can you fix those releases so he can’t reach them?

KEARSARGE: Oh sure.

_Fade. Lights pick up Burcke at the side_.

BURCKE: _(as narrator)_ They got an explanation out of Flannel, and it
satisfied none of them. He said he knew nothing of any cyanide. He said
that Heri, knowing he was a bad spaceman, had told him that if it got so
bad he couldn’t stand it, he could always come back in the lifeboat. But
if he did that, he’d have to do it before 14:30 after blastoff or there
wouldn’t be fuel enough to decelerate, start back, and maneuver a
landing. He insisted that that was all there was to it. He would not say
what he was doing aboard, except to state that Heri Gonza wanted him to
look out for Heri’s interests.

No amount of discussion made anything clearer. Heri certainly could not
have wanted the expedition to fail, nor his ship hurled away from the
solar system. They reluctantly concluded that some enemy of Heri Gonza’s
must have sabotaged them—someone they simply didn’t know.

The weeks went by—not easy ones, by any means, in those quarters,
without any event except Iris Barran’s puzzling discovery that the ship
required no astrogator after all: what the veteran Kearsarge couldn’t
handle in his head was easily treated in the computer. Why, then, had
Heri Gonza insisted on her cramming on astrogation?

_Zoom in to Saturn until it fills a quadrant. String out the moons_.

Heri Gonza watched the bridge sequence, as Saturn swept close and the
moons rolled by like broken beads, and little Iapetus swam close.
Iapetus is not a moon like most, round or oblate, but a rock, a drifting
mountain some 500 miles in diameter. And before them was the solution to
the mystery of the changing moonlight. Some unknown cataclysm has cloven
Iapetus, so that it has one sheer face, nearly four hundred square miles
of flat plain (or cliff, depending on how you look at it) made of pale
grey basaltic material. Since Iapetus always maintains one face to
Saturn, it always appears brighter as it rounds the eastern limb and
dimmer as it goes west, the albedo of the flat face being much higher
than the craggy ruin of the rest of its surface.

“Burckee, Burckee, Burckee ol’ turkey,” murmured the comedian in accents
of wonder, “who the hell writes your stuff? Who writes your lousy, lousy
stuff?”

_STOCK SHOT, FAFNIR PUTTING DOWN TAIL-FIRST ON ROCKY PLAIN, HORIZON
WASHED OUT AND BLACK SPACE BROUGHT DOWN CLOSE. ROCKS SHARP-CORNERED,
UNERODED. LONG SHOT, STABILIZING JACKS EXTENDING WIDEST. LADDER OUT. TWO
SUITED FIGURES RIDE IT DOWN, THE OTHER TWO CLIMB DOWN_.

_CLOSE-UP, ALL FOUR AT TAIL-BASE_.

HOROWITZ: _(filter mike)_ Check your radios. Read me?

ALL: Check. Read you fine.

HOROWITZ: Each take a line. Walk straight out with the line as a guide,
and when you’ve passed our scorch area, get a rock scraping every five
feet or so until you’re far enough away that the horizon’s a third of
the way up the hull. Got that? No further. _(Beat)_ And I can almost
tell you now, we aren’t going to find one blessed thing. No virus, no
spore, no nothing. My God, it’s no more than twelve, thirteen degrees K
in the shadows here. Anyway … let’s go.

BURCKE: _(off)_ Scratch and hop, scratch and hop. In this gravity, you
don’t move fast or push hard, or you’ll soar away and take minutes to
come down again. Shuffle and scratch, scratch and sweep, scratch and
hop. It took them hours.

_Close-up, Kearsarge, looking down_.

KEARSARGE: Here’s something.

_Close-ups, each of the other three, turning head at the sound of
Kearsarge’s voice_.

HOROWITZ: What is it?

KEARSARGE: Scorch. A regular mess of it. Hell, you know what? Swope
toppled his ship. I can see where he came down, where he took off,
scraping along to the big edge there.

FLANNEL: Wonder he didn’t wreck her.

KEARSARGE: He did. He couldn’t hurt the hull any in this gravity, but
he, sure as hell wiped off his antennae, because there they are:
landing, range, transmission—every one, by God. No wonder he come
barreling in the way he did. You can’t land a Fafnir on manual, but you
can try, and he tried. Poor ol’ Swopie.

HOROWITZ: Everybody over there by Kearsarge. Maybe Swope picked up
something where he scraped.

_Long shot of the four working around long scorch and scrape marks_.

BURCKE: _(off, narrating)_ They filled their specimen sacks and brought
them aboard, and then for seventy-two hours they went through their dust
and stones with every test Horowitz could devise.… He had been quite
right in his first guess. The moonlet Iapetus is as devoid of life as
the inside of an autoclave.

_Cut to foredeck set, but upended, the controls at highest point, the
floor what was the after bulkhead. Iris moving around with slow shuffle,
setting out magnetized plates on a steel table, each one hitting loudly.
In background, Flannel fusses with small electron mike, watching screen
and moving objective screws. Lifeboat blister open, Kearsarge inside,
working_.

_Airlock cycles, opens, and Horowitz comes in, suited, with sack. He is
weary. Iris helps with helmet_.

HOROWITZ: I’ve had it. Let’s get home. We can get just so duty-bound.

IRIS: What’s this “home”? I don’t remember.

HOROWITZ: You for home, Kearsarge?

KEARSARGE: Any time you’re through hoein’ this rock.

HOROWITZ: What are you doing in there?

KEARSARGE: Just routine. Figured you might want to buzz around the other
side with the boat.

HOROWITZ: Nosir. I came close enough on foot. I say we’re done here. A
man could sit home with a pencil and paper and figure out the density of
sub-microscopic growth this place would have to have to bring any back
on the hull. We’d be hip deep in it. The iapetitis virus didn’t come
from Iapetus, and that, friends, is for sure and official.

KEARSARGE: _(off)_ Oh my holy mother. _(He pops out, putty-colored.)_
George, get over here.

IRIS: (curiously) What is it?

_She goes over and disappears for a moment inside the boat, with
Kearsarge and Horowitz. Off, she gasps. Then, one by one they climb out
and stand looking at Flannel. Sensing the silence, he looks up and meets
their eyes_.

FLANNEL: What I got, blue horns or something?

HOROWITZ: Show him, Kearsarge.

_Kearsarge beckons. There is a strange pucker of grim amusement on his
craggy face_.

KEARSARGE: Come look, little feller. Then you can join our club.

_Reluctantly, the big man goes over to the blister and follows Kearsarge
into the lifeboat. Dolly after them, swing in to the instrument panel,
under it and look up_.

_Lashed to the projecting lower end of the main thrust control is a
silver can with a small cylinder at the near end_.

FLANNEL: _(pointing stupidly)_ Is that … that the same thing that …

KEARSARGE: A little smaller, but then you don’t need as much cyanide for
a boat.

FLANNEL: _(angry)_ Who the hell put it there? You?

KEARSARGE: Not me, feller. I just found it.

HOROWITZ: It’s been there all along, Flannel. Kearsarge is right: you
belong to the club too. You sure it was Heri Gonza told you to take the
boat?

FLANNEL: Sure it was. He couldn’t have nothing to do with this.
_(Suddenly it hits him)_ Jesus! I mighta …

HOROWITZ: We’ll have plenty of time to talk this over. Let’s pack up the
testing stuff and haul out of here.

FLANNEL: _(to no one)_ Jesus.

Heri Gonza lay back in the projection room and sipped his beer and
watched the stock shot of a Fafnir taking off from a rock plain. “You
really get all that glop out of that book, Burcke m’ boy?”

“Every bit of it,” said Burcke, watching the screen.

“You know how it is in space, a fellow’s got to do something with his
time. Sometimes he writes, and sometimes it’s fairy tales, and sometimes
you can get a pretty good show out of a fairy tale. But where you do
that, you call it a fairy tale. Follow me?”

“Yup.”

“This was really what went out on the air tonight?”

“Sure is.”

Very, very softly, Heri Gonza said, “Poor Burcke. Poor, poor ol’

Burcke.”

_Close-up, hands turning pages in rough logbook. Pull back to show
Burcke with book. He looks up, and when he speaks his voice is solemn_.

BURCKE: Time to think, time to talk it over. Time to put all the pieces
in the same place at the same time, and push them against each other to
see what fits.

_Fade to black; but it is not black after all: instead, starry space.
Pan across to pick up ship, a silver fish with a scarlet tail. Zoom in
fast, dissolve through hull, discovering foredeck. The four lounge
around, really relaxed, willing to think before speaking, and to speak
carefully. Horowitz and Kearsarge sit at the table ignoring a
chessboard. Iris is stretched on the deck with a rolled-up specimen sack
under her head. Flannel kneels before a spread of Canfield solitaire.
Horowitz is watching him_.

HOROWITZ: I like to think about Flannel.

FLANNEL: Think what?

HOROWITZ: Oh … the alternatives. The “ifs.” What would Flannel do if
this had been different, or that.

FLANNEL: There’s no sense in that kind of thinkin’—if this, if that.
This happened, or that happened, and that’s all there is to it. You got
anything special in mind?

HOROWITZ: I have, as a matter of fact. Given that you had a job to do,
namely to cut out and leave us with our cyanide bomb at the start of the
trip—

FLANNEL: _(aroused)_ I tol’ you and _tol’_ you that wasn’t a job. I
didn’t know about the damn cyanide.

HOROWITZ: Suppose you had known about it. Would you have come? If you
had come, would you have tipped us off about it? And here’s the question
I thought of: if the first bomb had failed—which it did—and there had
been no second bomb to tell you that you were a member of the Exit Club,
would you have tried to do the job on the way home?

FLANNEL: I was thinkin’ about it, about what to do.

HOROWITZ: And what did you decide?

FLANNEL: Nothin’. You found the bomb in the boat so I just stopped
thinkin’.

IRIS: _(suddenly)_ Why? Did that really make a difference?

FLANNEL: All the diff’nce in the world. Heri Gonza tol’ me to get in the
lifeboat before fourteen an’ a half hours and come back and tell him how
things went. Now if there was just _your_ bomb, could be that Heri Gonza
wanted you knocked off. There was an accident and it din’t knock you
off, and here I am working for him and wonderin’ if I shoon’t take up
where the bomb left off.

IRIS: Then we found the second bomb, and you changed your mind. Why?

FLANNEL: _(exasperated)_ Whata ya all, simple or somepin? Heri Gonza,
_he tol’ me to come back and tell him how it went_. If he tells me that
an’ then plants a bomb on me, how could I get back to tell him? A man’s
a fool to tell a guy to do somethin’ an’ then fix it so he can’t. He’s
no fool, Heri Gonza I mean, an’ you know it. Well then: if he din’t
plant my bomb, he din’t plant your bomb, because anyone can see they was
planted by the same guy. An’ if he din’t plant your bomb, he don’t want
you knocked off, so I stopped thinkin’ about it. Is that simple enough
for ya?

IRIS: I don’t know that it’s simple, but it sure is beautiful.

HOROWITZ: Well, one of us is satisfied of Heri Gonza’s good intentions.
Though I still don’t see what sense it made to go to all the trouble of
putting you aboard just to have you get off and go back right at the
start.

FLANNEL: Me neither. But do I have to understand everything he tells me
to do? I done lots of things for him I didn’t know what they was about.
You too, Kearsarge.

KEASARGE: That’s right. I drive this can from here to there, and from
there to yonder, and I don’t notice anything else, but if I notice it I
forget it, but if I don’t forget it I don’t talk about it. That’s the
way he likes it and we get along fine.

IRIS: _(forcefully)_ I think Heri Gonza wanted us all killed.

HOROWITZ: What’s that—intuition? And … shouldn’t that read “wants”?

IRIS: “Wants,” yes. He wants us all killed. No, it’s not intuition. It
formulates. Almost. There’s a piece missing.

FLANNEL: Ah, y’r out of y’r mind.

KEARSARGE: Doubled.

HOROWITZ: _(good naturedly)_ Shut up, both of you. Go on with that,
Iris. Maybe by you it formulates, but by me it intuits. Go on.

IRIS: Well, let’s use as a working hypothesis that Heri Gonza wants us
dead—us four. He wants more than that: he wants us to disappear from the
cosmos—no bodies, no graves, no nothing.

KEARSARGE: _But why?_

HOROWITZ: Just you listen. We start with the murders and finish with the
why. You’ll see.

IRIS: Well then, the ship will do the removal. The cyanide—both
cyanides—do the actual killing, and it hits so fast that the ship keeps
blasting, out and out until the fuel is gone, and forever after that. We
three are on it; Flannel crashes in a small craft and if anybody wonders
about it, they don’t wonder much. Is there any insignia on that boat, by
the way, Kearsarge?

KEARSARGE: Always.

IRIS: Go look, will you? Thanks. Now, what about the traces we leave
behind us? Well, we took off illegally so notified no one and filed no
clearances. You, George, were already in hiding from Heri Gonza’s
persecutions; Kearsarge here is so frequently away on indeterminate
trips of varying lengths that he would soon be forgotten; Flannel
here—no offense, Flannel—I don’t think anyone would notice that you’re
gone for good. As for me, Heri Gonza himself had me plant a story about
going off secretly for some solitary research for a year or so. What’s
the matter, Kearsarge?

KEARSARGE: I wouldn’ta believed it. No insignia. Filed off and sanded
smooth and painted. Numbers off the thrust block. Trade-name off the
dash, even. I … I wouldn’ta believed it.

HOROWITZ: Now you’d better listen to the lady.

IRIS: No insignia. So even poor Flannel’s little smashup is thoroughly
covered. Speaking of Flannel, I say again that it was stretching
credibility to put him aboard that way—unless you assume that he was put
aboard like the rest of us, to be done away with. I certainly came under
false pretenses: Heri Gonza not only told me he needed an astrogator for
the trip, which he didn’t, but had me bone up on the subject.

Now we can take a quick look at motive. George Horowitz here is the most
obvious. He has for a long time been a thorn in the flesh of that
comedian. Not only has he concluded that Heri Gonza doesn’t really want
to find a cure for iapetitis—he says so very loudly and as often as he
can. In addition, George is always on the very verge of whipping the
disease, something that frightens Heri Gonza so much that he’s actually
hoarding patients so George can’t get to them. Also, he doesn’t _like_
George.

Why kill Flannel? Is he tired of you, Flannel? Did you boggle something
he asked you to do?

FLANNEL: He don’t have to kill me, Miss Iris. He could fire me any time.
I’d feel real bad, but I wouldn’t bother him none. He knows that.

IRIS: Then you must know too much. You must know something about him so
dangerous he won’t feel safe until you’re dead.

FLANNEL: So help me lady, there ain’t a single thing like that I know
about him. Not one. Not that I know of.

HOROWITZ: There’s the key, Iris. He doesn’t know he knows it.

KEASARGE: Then that’s me too, because if there’s a single thing I know
that he’d have to kill me for then I don’t know what it is.

IRIS: You said “key.” Lock and key. A combination of things. Like if you
put what Flannel knows with what Kearsarge knows, they will be dangerous
to Heri Gonza.

_Flannel and Kearsarge gape at each other blankly and simultaneously
shrug_.

HOROWITZ: I can give you one example of a piece of knowledge we all have
that would be dangerous to him. We now know that the disease virus does
not originate on Iapetus. Which means that poor Swope was not
responsible for bringing it to earth, and, further, the conclusion that
the little Tresak girl—the first case—caught it from the wreckage of the
space ship, was unwarranted.

FLANNEL: I brung that picture of that little girl standing in the wreck,
I brung it to Heri Gonza. He liked it.

IRIS: What made you do that?

FLANNEL: I done it all the time. He told me to.

HOROWITZ: Bring him pictures of little girls?

FLANNEL: Girls, boys … but pretty ones. I got to know just the ones he
would like. He liked to use ’em on his show.

_Iris and Horowitz lock glances for one horrified second, and then
pounce all but bodily on Flannel_.

IRIS: Did you ever show him a picture of any child who later contracted
the disease?

FLANNEL: _(startled)_ Wh … I dunno.

IRIS: _(shouting)_ Think! Think!

HOROWITZ: _(also shouting)_ You did! You did! The Tresak girl—that
photograph of her was taken before she had the disease!

FLANNEL: Well yeah, her. And that little blond one he had on the
telethon that din’t speak no English from Est’onia, but you’re not
lettin’ me think.

FLANNEL: What?

KEARSARGE: I remember that little blond girl. I flew her from Esthonia.

IRIS: Before or after she had the disease?

KEARSARGE: _(shrugging)_ The kind of thing I never noticed. She … she
looked all right to me. Real pretty little kid.

IRIS: How long before the telethon was that?

KEARSARGE: Week or so. Wait, I can tell you to the day. _(He rises from
the chess table and goes to a locker, from which he brings a notebook.
He leafs.)_ Here it is. Nine days.

IRIS: _(faintly)_ He said, on the telethon, three days … first symptoms.

HOROWITZ: _(excitedly)_ May I see that? _(Takes book, riffles it, throws
it on the table, runs to lab, comes back with cardboard file, fans
through it, comes up with folder.)_ Iris, take Kearsarge’s book. Right.
Now did he fly to Belem on the ninth of May?

IRIS: The sixth.

HOROWITZ: Rome, around March twelfth.

IRIS: March twelfth, March—here it is. The eleventh.

HOROWITZ: One more. Indianapolis, middle of June.

IRIS: Exactly. The fifteenth. What is that you have there?

_He throws it down in front of her_.

HOROWITZ: Case files. Arranged chronologically by known or estimated
date of first symptom, in an effort to find some pattern of incidence.
No wonder there was never any pattern. God in Heaven, if he wanted a
clinic in Australia, cases would occur in Australia.

FLANNEL: _(bewildered)_ I don’t know what you all are talkin’ about.

KEARSARGE: _(grimly)_ I think I do.

IRIS: Now do you think you’re worth murdering—you who can actually place
him on the map, at the time some child was stricken, every single time?

KEARSARGE: _(huskily)_ I’m worth murdering. I … didn’t know.

FLANNEL: _(poring over the case file)_ Here’s that one I seen in
Bellefontaine that time, she had on a red dress. And this little guy
here, he got his picture in a magazine I found on the street in Little
Rock and I had to go clear to St. Louis to find him.

_Kearsarge hops up on a chair and kicks Flannel in the head_.

FLANNEL: _(howling)_ Hooo—wow! What you wanna hafta do that for? Ya
little …

HOROWITZ: Cut it out, you two. _Cut it out!_ That’s better. We don’t
have room for that in here. Leave him alone, Kearsarge. His time will
come. Heaven help me, Iris, it’s been in front of my nose right from the
start, and I didn’t see it. I even told you once that I was so close
because I could synthesize a virus which would actually cause the
disease—but it wouldn’t maintain it? I had this _idée fixe_ that it was
an extra-terrestrial disease. Why? Because it acted like a synthetic
_and no natural terran virus does_. Serum from those kids always acted
that way—it would cause a form of iapetitis which would fade out in
three months or less. _All you have to do to cure the damn thing is to
stop injecting it!_

IRIS: Oh, the man, the lovely clever man and his family all over the
world, the little darlings, the prettiest ones he could find, whom he
never, never failed to visit regularly … _(Suddenly, she is crying)_ I
was so s-sorry for him! Remember the night he … tore himself open to
tell us he c-couldn’t have k-kids of his own?

KEARSARGE: Who you talking about—Heri Gonza? For Pete’s sake, he got an
ex-wife and three kids he pays money to keep ’em in Spain, and another
ex-wife in Paris France with five kids, three his, and that one in
Pittsburgh—man, that comedian’s always in trouble. He _hates_ kids—I
mean really hates ’em.

_(Iris begins to laugh. Probably hysteria.)_

_Dissolve to black, then to starry space. To black again, bring up pool
of light, resolve it into:_

_Burcke, sitting at desk. He closes log book_.

BURCKE: This is, I regret to say, a true story. The Fafnir 203 came in
at night six days ago at a small field some distance from here, and Dr.
Horowitz phoned me. After considerable discussion it was decided to
present this unhappy story to you in the form written up by the four
people who actually experienced it. They are here with me now. And here
is a much maligned man, surely one of the greatest medical researchers
alive—Dr. Horowitz.

HOROWITZ: Thank you. First I wish to assure everyone within reach of my
voice that what has been said here about iapetitis is true: it is a
synthetic disorder which is, by its very nature, harmless, and which, if
contracted will pass away spontaneously in from two to twelve weeks. Not
a single child has died of it, and those who have been its victims the
longest—some up to two years—have unquestionably been lavishly treated.
A multiple murder was attempted upon my three companions and myself, of
course, but it was our greatest desire to see to it that that charge is
not pressed.

BURCKE: I wish to express the most heartfelt apologies from myself and
all my colleagues for whatever measure of distress this network and its
affiliates may have unwittingly brought you, the public. It is as an
earnest of this that we suffer, along with you, through the following
film clip, taken just two days ago in the I. F. clinic in Montreal. What
you see in my hand here is a thin rubber glove, almost invisible on the
hand. Fixed to its fingertips is a microscopic forest of tiny sharp
steel points, only a few thousandths of an inch long. And this metal
box, just large enough to fit unobtrusively in a side pocket, contains a
jellied preparation of the synthetic virus.

_Fade to:_

_Wild hilarity in a hospital ward. Children in various stages of
iapetitis, laughing hilariously at the capering, growling, gurgling,
belching funny man as he moves from bed to bed, Peep! at you, peep-peep
at you, and one by one ruffling the little heads at the nape, dipping
the fingertips in the side jacket packet between each bed_.

_Dissolve, and bring up Burke_.

BURCKE: Good night, ladies, gentlemen, boys and girls …

_I’m sorry_.

The lights came up in the projection room. There was nobody there with
Heri Gonza but Burcke: all the others had quietly moved and watched the
last few scenes from the doorway, and slipped away.

“You did air it?” asked the comedian, making absolutely sure.

“Yes.”

Heri Gonza looked at him without expression and walked toward the stage
door. It opened as he approached, and four people came in. Flannel,
Kearsarge, Horowitz, Iris Barran.

Without a word Flannel stepped up to the comedian and hit him in the
stomach. Heri Gonza sank slowly to the floor, gasping.

Horowitz said, “We’ve spent a lot of time deciding what to do about you,
Heri Gonza. Flannel wanted just one poke at you and wouldn’t settle for
anything else. The rest of us felt that killing was too good for you,
but we wanted you dead. So we wrote you that script. Now you’re dead.”

Heri Gonza rose after a moment and walked through the stage door and out
to the middle of acres and acres of stage. He stood there alone all
night, and in the morning was gone.



THE GRAVEYARD READER


The stone was included in the price of the plot; I hadn’t known. I
hadn’t wanted a stone because stones have to say something, and what can
you say in a case like this? But unwittingly I’d bought the thing and
because I had, the man had put it up—what else? I had anger enough to
scatter around heart-deep, but, reasonably, not a flake for the men who
had put up the stone.

It was a right and proper stone, I supposed, if one must have one of the
things at all: bigger than many of the cheating, bargain sort of stones
that stood nearby, and tastefully smaller than the hulking ostentatious
ones. _Here lies my wife between poverty and vulgarity_. Now there you
go. Have a single elevating thought about that woman and it comes out
sounding like that. Soils everything she touches.

The stone called me a liar for that. It was of a whitish granite that
would weather whiter still. It had edges of that crinkly texture like
matted hair that nothing would stick to because nothing could possibly
want to, and a glossy face that nothing would stick to if it wanted
nothing else. Whited sepulcher, that’s what the hell. The stone is its
own epitaph, because look: it’s white forever, white and clean, and it
has no words—which is to say, nothing. Nothing, and clean, ergo, _Here
lies nothing clean_.

What I always say is, there’s a way to say anything in the world if you
can only think of the way to say it, and I had. I liked this epitaph
just fine. There would be no words on this stone, and it had its
epitaph.

Laughing out loud is bad form in a graveyard, and stepping down hard on
a man’s instep is bad form anywhere. This was the moment when, backing
off for some perspective on this my masterpiece, I did both these
things. The man, apparently, had been standing behind me watching. I
whirled and looked him up and down, hoping sincerely that he was
offended. There are times in a man’s life when he wouldn’t want even his
friends to like him, and such a time is no time to pay court to the
esteem of a stranger.

He wasn’t offended. All I got out of him (just then) was a pleasant
smile. He had a sort of anybody’s face, the like of which you might
encounter anywhere, which is to say he had the kind of face you wouldn’t
be surprised to see visiting a cemetery. I’ll say this for him: he was
harmonious; his voice and clothing exactly suited his face, and though
he wasn’t an old man, the things he said weren’t hard to figure, coming
from a man like that. You could tell he was experienced.

Neither of us said anything right away when I bumped him. He sort of put
his hands on my shoulders for a second either to hold one of us up or to
keep the other from falling, which gave the gesture a full fifty per
cent chance of being selfish, and I am not about to give away a
thank-you in the face of those odds. As for an excuse-me, I didn’t want
to be excused, I wanted to be blamed. So I glared at first, while he
smiled, and after those things got used up there was nothing for it but
to stand where we were, side by side, looking at my wife’s grave because
that was straight ahead and we couldn’t just go on looking at each
other. It was while we were doing this that he said, “Mind if I read
it?”

I looked at him. Even if this had been the perfect time and place for
joking, a face that looked the way his face looked contained no jests. I
looked from him to the bland, uncommunicative sheet of stone and the raw
mound with its neat planes still unslumped by wind or water, and I
looked back at him. It occurred to me then that maybe his eyes weren’t
so good, and he honestly didn’t know there was nothing on the stone.
“Yes,” I said as offensively as I could, “I mind.”

He put up his hands placatingly, and said in that same good-natured way,
“All right, all right! I won’t.” And he gave me a sort of friendly
half-wave and started off.

I looked at the grave and at his retreating back and “Hey!” I called
before I realized I wanted to.

He came back, smiling. “Yes?”

I felt robbed, that’s why I called him back. I’d realized I wanted to
see his face when he got close enough to squint at that unmarked stone.
I said, “What I mean is, I’d mind if anyone read anything off that. It
would give me the creeps.”

He didn’t even glance toward the grave, but said patiently, “It’s all
right. I promised you I wouldn’t.”

I said, “Oh for God’s sake,” disgustedly, and with an angry motion
beckoned him to follow me. I had that oafish feeling you get when you
tell a joke and somebody doesn’t get it, so instead of letting the
matter drop you lay your ears back and start explaining, knowing
perfectly well that when you finally get the point across it isn’t going
to be funny, either to your victim or to yourself. I ranged up on one
side of the grave and he came up and crossed over and stood at the other
side, not four feet away from the headstone. He was looking right at it,
but didn’t say anything, so I barked, “Well?”

“Well,” he asked politely, “what?”

The oafish feeling intensified. “Don’t you find the language of that
epitaph a little on the terse side?” I said sarcastically.

He glanced at it. “There’s never very much on the stone,” he said, and
added, as if to himself, “while it’s new.”

“New or old,” I said, and I guess I showed something of the anger I
felt, “the way it is is the way it stays. Anything that gets written on
the rock is not going to be written by me.”

“Naturally not,” he said.

To make it quite clear, I said, “Or by anyone I hire.”

“Well,” he said comfortingly, “don’t worry. I won’t read it, now or
later.”

“You can say that again,” I growled. I was finally coming to a certainty
about this grave. “The less said about this whole thing, including her
_and_ her slab, the better. That was her strong point anyway; keeping
her mouth shut. At long last, anything she’s hiding, she can keep. I
don’t want to hear it.”

“Then you won’t,” he said peacefully, “and neither will I, because I’ve
promised.” After a sort of pause, he added, “I think I ought to warn
you, though, that somebody else might come along and read it, not
knowing of your objections.”

“What are you talking about?”

“I’m not the only one in the world who can read graves.”

“I told you—I’m not putting any inscription on. Not a monogram. Not so
much as _Hers_, or even—hey, this would be cute: _Her lies_. Not that
she was really ever a liar. She just wouldn’t _say_.”

“The inscriptions never say very much by themselves,” he said in his
patient voice, “taken out of context.”

“What do you mean, context?”

“I don’t think you quite understood me. I didn’t say I read gravestones.
I said I read graves.”

I looked blankly at that tidy, tamped-down mound and the virgin stone,
and back at the shovel-patted yellow earth turning grainy in the late
warm sunlight, and a more uncommunicative arrangement I had never laid
eyes on. It conveyed nothing about her, and for that matter, nothing
about anyone else. Me, for instance. No flowers.

“Not this one, you can’t,” I said finally.

“I wouldn’t.”

“That promise of yours,” I said with a certain amount of smug enmity,
“comes in pretty handy, doesn’t it? I think I see what you’re driving
at, and I don’t think it’s any too funny. You’ve spent a lot of time
ghouling around places like this until you can tell to a dime what the
planting cost, how much the survivors give a damn, if any, how long the
box has been buried, and how good a job the crew did on the detail. But
any time there’s a little more than readily meets the eye, like a guy
who says he won’t have an inscription after paying for a stone, you
don’t have to risk a wrong guess. You just make a gentlemanly promise,
casual-like.” I snorted through my nostrils.

He still wouldn’t let me annoy him. He simply explained where I was
wrong. He said, “It isn’t like that at all. There’s nothing to deduce,
or to guess at. It’s all there,” he said, nodding at but not looking at
the grave, “to be read. I’ll admit that it’s a little harder to do on a
very new grave; you might say that it’s all in very fine print and a
little hard to see unless you read well. But in time it all comes
clear—very clear. As to the promise, it’s very obvious that you wouldn’t
want a stranger like myself to know everything about her.”

“Everything?” I laughed bitterly. “Nobody knows everything about _her_.”

“Well, it’s all there.”

“You know what’s happened to me,” I said a little too loudly and a
little too fast, “I’m a little bit out of my head from all that’s
happened the last week or so, which makes me stand here listening to you
as if you made sense.”

He didn’t say anything.

“By God,” I mumbled, not talking to him or to anyone special at the
moment, “it wasn’t too long ago I’d given anything you like to know some
things about that woman. Only since I made up my mind I don’t want to
know, I feel much better,” I said feeling miserable. “You know what she
did, she wasn’t home when I got there that night, we’d had a little sort
of fight the morning before, and that night she was just gone. No note
and she didn’t pack anything or take anything but that one green tweed
suit and that stupid hat she used to wear with it. If she had any money
it wasn’t much. Then, nothing for three whole days and nights, until
that phone call.” My hands got all knotted up and then seemed to get too
heavy, pulling my shoulders into a slump. I sat down on the edge of an
iron pipe railing at the edge of the next grave and let the heavy hands
dangle down between my thighs. I hung my head down so I could watch them
while I talked. Watching them didn’t tell me anything. “Phone call from
the police who found her driver’s license in her handbag, the one that
matched that stupid hat.”

I raised my head and looked across the grave at the man. I couldn’t see
him too clearly until I hit myself across the eyes with my sleeve. The
cuff buttons had got themselves turned around, and it hurt. “Eight
hundred miles from home with some guy in a sports car, and all she had
on was one of those fancified bathrobes, you know, hostess gown, a good
one, I never saw it before. Don’t know where the green suit got to or
the stupid hat either. Bag was in the car. Car was in an oak tree. No
kidding. Upside down in an oak tree fifteen feet off the ground. The
police said he had to be going a hundred and twenty to hit as hard as
that. I never heard of him before. I don’t know how she got there. I
don’t know why. Well,” I said after I thought about it for a minute, “I
guess I do know more or less why, but not _exactly why;_ not exactly
what was in her mind when she did whatever it was she did to get herself
into that. I never knew exactly what was in her mind. I could never get
her to say. She would …”

I guess at that point I stopped talking out loud, because it all turned
into a series of swift pictures, one after the other, inside my head,
too fast for words, and too detailed. _What’s the matter?_ I’d be
saying, and her, kissing my hands, looking up at me with tears in her
eyes: _Can’t you see?_ And again: me yelling at her, _Well if what I do
makes you unhappy, why don’t you tell me what you want? Go ahead, write
the script, I’ll play it_. And the way she’d turn her back when I talked
like that, and I’d hear her voice softly: _If you’d only—_and _I
just_—and then she’d stall, inarticulate, shake her head. She never
talked enough. She never said the things that … that … World of feeling,
spectrum of sensitivity, and no words, no dammit dammit words. Picture
of her smiling, looking off, out, a little up; I say _What are you so
happy about?_

_Oh_, she says, coming back into the world, _Oh_.… and whispers my name
four times, smiling. Now what is that—communication?

“I got so there was nothing in the world for me, sleeping or waking or
working or mixing a drink,” I said aloud to the man, “but _why won’t she
tell me?_ And right to the end, she did that to me. Wondering why she
does this or that, why she wears one particular kind of look instead of
another, maybe, after all, these things don’t matter. But look how she
winds up, dead in that new housecoat I didn’t buy for her, eight hundred
miles from home with a guy I don’t know; all in the world I have now is
_why? why?_ and the idea that she wound it up in the one way where I’d
never find out. I mean,” I added as soberly as I could, because I was
unaccountably out of breath, just from talking to a man, imagine? “I
mean, not that I want to find out. Because I don’t give a damn any
more.”

“Well, that’s good then,” he said, “because you’ll save yourself a lot
of trouble.”

“What trouble?”

“Learning to read graves.”

I got enormously tired of this conversation suddenly. “Now what good
would it do me to learn a thing like that?”

“None,” he said in that pleasant way of his. “You have just finished
saying that you don’t want to know anything about her, any more.”

“It finally sinks in,” I said sarcastically, “that what you’re trying to
tell me is that a person who can read graves can stand in front of one
and read it like a book.”

“A biography.” He nodded.

“And get out of it everything that person ever did.”

“Or said, or thought,” he agreed.

I looked at the grave, its empty crumbling bare planes, its empty-faced
headstone. I looked again, but briefly, at the events that had made it
be here just where it was, when it was, containing what, and I wet my
lips and said, “You’re kidding.”

He never seemed to answer what deserved no answer, that man.

I asked him, “Even things nobody ever knew before?”

“Especially those things,” he said. “What you can see of a human being
is only the outside of the top part of the surface. Now if everything—is
there—” he pointed—“to be read—_everything_—then it follows that you can
read far more than the most penetrating analysis of anything living.”
When I had no response to this, he said, “Living things aren’t finished,
you see. Everything they have ever been in contact with, each thought
they have had, each person they have known—these things are still at
work in them; nothing’s finished.”

“And when they’re buried, they … do something to the grave? There’s a
real difference between one grave and another, or … a grave would be
different if one person or another was buried in it?”

“It has to be that way,” he said. Again one of those odd, waiting
pauses, which I refused to take for myself. He said, “Surely you’ve had
that feeling that a human being is too much, has too much, means too
much just to go out like a light, or be eroded away like the soil of a
dust bowl.”

I looked at the grave. So new, so raw, so … blank. In a low voice, I
asked, “What do you read?”

He understood what I meant: what are the “letters,” the “words,” the
“grammar”?

He said, “A lot of things. The curve of the mound, the encroachment of
growth on it—grass, weeds, mosses. The kind of vegetation that grows
there, and the shape of each stem and leaf, even the veining in them.
The flight of insects over it, the shadows they cast, the contours of
rain rivulets as they form, as they fill, as they dry.” He laughed
deprecatingly. “It sounds like more than a man could learn, doesn’t it?”

I thought it did.

He said, “You are so completely familiar with the act of reading that it
never occurs to you how complex an act it is, or how vast is your
accomplishment. You take in stride a variety of alphabets—upper case and
lower case are very nearly two separate ones, and then upper and lower
case in script are quite different from printing or typing. Old English
and black-letter faces might slow you down but they won’t stop you. Your
eye measures light intensities between ink and paper: green letters on a
yellow page wouldn’t stop you. You select, without effort, just what you
read on a page and what you do not. For example, every page of a book
might have the book title at the top and a page number at the bottom,
and you don’t even know they’re there. In a magazine or a newspaper,
blocks of type might be broken up, carried over, interrupted by pictures
or advertisements, and you sail right along reading what you are
interested in and nothing else. You might notice a misprint or a
misspelling, or even an out-of-context line of type lost in the middle
of your paragraph, but in most cases it doesn’t bother you much. In
addition, you’re reading in English—one of the richest of all languages,
but also one of the most difficult, with irregular structure, spelling,
and some pretty far-fetched semantic shorthand and shortcuts. But all
these are the rarefied complications; to get back to basics, what about
the letters themselves? The letter ‘a’ doesn’t look like the sound—or
several sounds—of ‘a.’ It’s only a most arbitrary symbol, chosen by
custom and usage to mean what it means.”

“But … at least there’s a system. I mean, an established alphabet.
Accepted spelling. And for all their exceptions, there are rules of
grammar and syntax.”

Again he said nothing, just waiting for me to come up with something or
other. To think, perhaps.

I did, and said, “Oh. You mean there is some such system,” I laughed
suddenly. “A crooked thorn for the letter ‘b,’ and a line of mud for
past tense?”

He smiled and nodded. “Not those, but things like those. Yes, that’s the
idea.”

“Not as hard as it seems at first, hm?”

“The thing you try to put over to every first grader,” he agreed.
“But—it is hard. As hard as anything else you can study. Just as
hopeless looking at times, too, when the overall pattern just won’t
emerge and all your work seems useless. Then—it comes clear, and you go
on.”

I looked at him and said, “I don’t know why I believe you.”

He waited until I said, “—but I’d like to learn that trick.”

“Why?”

I glanced at the bare new grave. “You said … _‘everything.’_ You said I
could find out what she did, with whom. And—why.”

“That’s right.”

“So … let’s go. Where do we start?” I went down on one knee and made an
across-the-board gesture at my wife’s grave.

“Not here.” He smiled. “You don’t use Dostoevsky as a first reader.”

“Dostoevsky? _Her?_”

“They’re all Dostoevskys. They can all express every shade of meaning of
every event, and through what they think and feel one can see the
meaning of all their world. Isn’t that what makes a great writer?”

“I guess it is … but … great writer? _Her?_”

“She lived,” he said. “Now what she was is … graven here. Living and
feeling are things done by everybody. Writing on their graves is done by
everybody. Dostoevsky, now, had what you might term a _previous_ skill.
He could do it while he was alive. Dead, they can all do it.”

This guy made my head spin. I got up slowly and followed him to the
“first reader.” Like most such volumes, it was a very little one. I went
back every evening, after work, for nearly a year. I learned the meaning
of the curl of a leaf and the glisten of wet pebbles, and the special
significance of curves and angles. A great deal of the writing was
unwritten. Plot three dots on a graph and join them; you now have a
curve with certain characteristics. Extend that curve while maintaining
the characteristics, and it has meaning, up where no dots are plotted.
In just this way I learned to extend the curve of a grass blade and of a
protruding root, of the bent edges of wetness on a drying headstone.

I quit smoking so I could sharpen my sense of smell, because the scent
of earth after a rain has a clarifying effect on graveyard reading, as
if the page were made whiter and the ink darker. I began to listen to
the wind, and to the voices of birds and small animals, insects and
people, because to the educated ear, every sound is filtered through the
story written on graves, and becomes a part of it.

The man met me every day; early or late, he was around. I never asked
him anything about himself. Somehow that never came up. He never read
anything to me. He would point out the “letters” and occasionally the
“letter groups” like (analogously) “-ing” and “-ous” and “un-,” and
would correct me where I read it wrong. But when I got to where I could
read whole sentences, he stopped me. He told me that the one thing I
must never do is to read off what I read on a grave, aloud. Not even to
him. Those who could read it, would, if they cared to. Those who could
not must learn as I was learning, or not know what was written there.
“There are reasons enough for not wanting to die,” he told me, “without
adding the fear that someone like you will go around abusing this
privilege.”

I would go home at night filled with a gray hope, that at last all the
mysteries of that woman would be solved for me, and every sordid, rotten
thing she had done and kept secret would be illuminated for me. I didn’t
sleep very well—I hadn’t, since the day she left—and I had lots of time
to think over the things she had done to me, and the things she probably
had done to me, and the things she was doubtless capable of doing. Maybe
this long period of insufficient sleep did something to me; I don’t
know, but I didn’t mind it. I did my work at the office, enough to get
along, saving my strength and my brain for the evening; and then I
worked at my lessons. I worked.

We went from the “first readers” into more complicated stuff. You can
have no idea how complicated a thing like a three-year-old is when you
first start. The only thing that took me through this stage was his
promise that however hopeless it looked, sooner or later the pattern
would emerge and I’d understand and could go on. He was right. He was
always right.

I began to learn about people. I began to find out how many were afraid
of the same things—afraid of being shut out, of being found out, of
being unloved, unwanted, or—worst of all—unneeded. I learned how flimsy
were the bases of so many of their fears, and how unimportant, in the
long run, were the things on which so many of them pitifully spent their
lives. More than anything else, I learned how uncharacteristic of most
of them were their cruelties, how excusable their stupidities; in short,
how damned decent they were.

I found out the differences between “the truth” and “all the truth.” You
can know some pretty terrible things about a person, and you can know
they’re true. But sometimes it makes a huge difference if you know what
else is true too. I read something in a book once about an old lady who
was walking along the street minding her own business when a young guy
came charging along, knocked her down, rolled her in a mud puddle,
slapped her head and smeared handsful of wet mud all over her hair. Now
what should you do with a guy like that?

But then if you find out that someone had got careless with a drum of
gasoline and it ignited and the old lady was splashed with it, and the
guy had presence of mind enough to do what he did as fast as he did, and
severely burned his hands in the doing of it, then what should you do
with him?

Yet everything reported about him is true. The only difference is the
amount of truth you tell.

Reading a grave, you read it all. All of the truth makes a
difference—but what a difference—in the way you feel about people.

One day the man said to me, “I would say that there are only a
half-dozen graves here that are beyond you. I think you’re a pretty
remarkable student.”

I said thanks, but I’d blame the quality of the teaching. “You’ve taken
an awful lot of trouble over me.”

He shrugged. “It’s what I do,” he said inclusively. Then he waited.

I wondered what he was waiting for, and so searched back through what he
had been saying. “Oh,” I said, and with him, looked up at the north
corner of the cemetery where my wife’s grave lay. It wasn’t sharp-planed
any more, or bare. Everything about it had changed … been
changed … except, of course, that unsoilable headstone. So. “Oh,” I
said. “I could read it.”

“Easily,” he said.

I went up there. I don’t know if he followed me. I wasn’t thinking about
him any more. I came to the grave and stood looking at it for a long
time. I thought about her, and about the facts I had. Truths. The truth
about her. The time I pried her out of a dark corner at a party with a
drunk named Wilfred. The time she snatched a letter off the mantel when
I came in and threw it into the fire. The time that guy on the boat
laughed when her name was mentioned and then shut up when he found I was
married to her. More than anything else, the fact of her death in the
sports car, the fact of that housecoat, of the missing tweed suit and
stupid hat. Now I could know. Now I could know what, where, and how many
times. Now I could know why.

I guess I was up there for longer than I realized.

When I came to myself it was almost dark, and growing cold. I almost
fell when I started to walk. I walked slowly until my legs woke up and,
seeing a light in the caretaker’s building, went in to talk to the old
fellow for a minute. I didn’t see the graveyard reader around anywhere.

I was back the next morning. It was Saturday. The stonecutter was there
already, crouched in front of my plot, tick-ticking away. I’d had to
agree to time-and-a-half to get him, but I was willing. When at last I
decided on an epitaph for that stone, I wanted it put there, and right
now.

I walked up there to watch the man work. He knew his trade, that
stonecutter, and he had almost finished. After a few minutes I was aware
of someone standing next to me, and sure enough, it was the graveyard
reader. “Hi.”

“How are you?” he asked—not the way anyone else might ask, but meaning
it: how was I? what had happened? how did I feel about it? was I all
right?

“I’m all right,” I said. Also, not the way you’d say it to just anybody.

Silently we watched the man finish up. I nodded to him and said it was
fine. He grinned and gathered up his tools and the tarpaulin with the
chips in it, and waved and went away. The reader and I stood looking at
the inscription.

I said, a little embarrassed, “Not very original.”

“But very effective,” he answered.

“You think so? You really think so?”

He nodded, and that made me very, very glad. I hadn’t meant to tell him,
but it slipped out in one great big blurt: “I didn’t read it.”

“No?”

“No,” I said. “I came up here and stood for a long time, thinking
about … all the work I’d done to be able to read it, and about—the
truth, what kind of a difference all the truth makes. And I thought a
lot about people, and about … _her_.”

“Yes,” he said, interested and … non-prying.

“Yes, about her, the things she’d done, the things she could have done.
The way she used to talk to me. Do you know, people like her, who aren’t
so hot with words—they have ways of talking, if you can read them,
almost like a grave has?”

“I think you’re right.”

“Well, I thought about that too. And my own illiteracy …” I laughed in
some sort of embarrassment and said, “Anyway, the way it wound up, I
didn’t read it. I went and ordered this epitaph instead.”

“Why that particular one?”

We read it over together, and I said, “It’s taken me over a year, and a
pretty tough year at that, but this is what I wanted to say to her. This
is what I want her to know, now and from now on, from me.”

He laughed.

I confess to being a little annoyed at that, even after all I had gone
through with this fellow. “What’s funny?”

“_You’re_ saying that, to _her?_”

“Something wrong with that?”

“Sure is,” he said. And he walked off, and when I called, he just waved,
but kept on walking.

I turned to look back at the headstone, with its clean new inscription.
I’d put it there because I wanted to say something to her that …

_Me?_ say something to _her?_

No wonder he had laughed. A guy spends more than a year learning to read
a grave, and then gets the silly notion that it’s reading him.

So I read it again—not the grave; I would never read that—I read just
the inscription. I read what she said to me, now, this morning, new and
crisp and for the very first time: _Rest in peace_.

“Thanks, honey,” I whispered, “I will,” and I went on home and got the
first real sleep I’d had since she’d left me.



THE MAN WHO TOLD LIES


Once there was a man who all the time told lies and everybody hated him
and diden’t trust him even when he said what time it is they woulden’t
believe him so one day the craziest thing hapened he was driving his car
to work in the morning, and his car slipped on a banana peal only it was
reely a whole bunch of banana peals where a garbage truck had a accident
and spilled on the road so he cracked a lampost.

The policemen was really mad about it and pinched the man to the
courthouse and it took a while to get it all fixed. So when he got to
work he was late and his boss said what hapened to you and the man said
my car sliped on a banana peal and the boss said you’re a liar everybody
knows that and if I got any more trouble from you out you go. And no
matter what the man said they woulden’t beleive him.

So he was walking in the park afterwards and he felt real mean and low
and he sat down and a funny little man sat down on the bench too and
said whats the matter. And the man said everybody picks on me I am a
well known liar and when I get around to telling the truth nobdy
believes me anyway: The other man said gosh. I can fix that easy because
I am a Magician so the man said he dident beleive in that Magic stuff
and the old man said you want people to beleive you you got to start out
beleiving me so the man said alright then and the Magician made a spell
wich dident hurt.

So he forgot about it for awhile until he met a lady he knew and she
said hello hello I’m glad to see you and he was going to say he was glad
to see her but he wasen’t because he dident reely like her she gave him
a pain so what came out of his mouth was Well. Im not glad to see you
because you give me a pain so she got so mad she was going to hit him
with her pocket book but he ran. So then later he went to dinner were he
was invited and the lady said how did you like the dinner and before he
could stop he said the meat was tough and the peas taste like garbage
which was the truth. So there was one more person who diden’t like him.

In the morning the boss was going to give him a raise so he called him
in to the ofice and said Well how do you like working here and the man
said before he could stop I dont like the work and I dont like you
eather wich was the truth. So the boss fired him. Then he went walking
in the park again to find the little Magician man. And he found him and
said to take off the Magic spell because he said he was a lot better
when he was a liar. He said the way it is now I get in trouble every
time I open my mouth it seems everybody tells lies to each other all the
time like Im glad to see you and I wish you luck and all that when they
reely dont mean it. Well the Magician said you just dont know which lies
to tell and which not to I hope you learn a lesson but about the spell
your out of luck because that spell is pernamet so just work hard and
watch what you say.

Then the man got a new job and worked hard as he could and when people
asked him anything he just shut his mouth and worked even harder. So
when he got home that night his wife said how about the new job is the
work hard and he said yes wich it was she said. are you tired and he
said tired Im dead so then he droped dead.

—Billy Watson



THE MAN WHO LOST THE SEA


Say you’re a kid, and one dark night you’re running along the cold sand
with this helicopter in your hand, saying very fast
witchy-witchy-witchy. You pass the sick man and he wants you to shove
off with that thing. Maybe he thinks you’re too old to play with toys.
So you squat next to him in the sand and tell him it isn’t a toy, it’s a
model. You tell him look here, here’s something most people don’t know
about helicopters. You take a blade of the rotor in your fingers and
show him how it can move in the hub, up and down a little, back and
forth a little, and twist a little, to change pitch. You start to tell
him how this flexibility does away with the gyroscopic effect, but he
won’t listen. He doesn’t want to think about flying, about helicopters,
or about you, and he most especially does not want explanations about
anything by anybody. Not now. Now, he wants to think about the sea. So
you go away.

The sick man is buried in the cold sand with only his head and his left
arm showing. He is dressed in a pressure suit and looks like a man from
Mars. Built into his left sleeve is a combination time-piece and
pressure gauge, the gauge with a luminous blue indicator which makes no
sense, the clock hands luminous red. He can hear the pounding of surf
and the soft swift pulse of his pumps. One time long ago when he was
swimming he went too deep and stayed down too long and came up too fast,
and when he came to it was like this: they said, “Don’t move, boy.
You’ve got the bends. Don’t even try to move.” He had tried anyway. It
hurt. So now, this time, he lies in the sand without moving, without
trying.

His head isn’t working right. But he knows clearly that it isn’t working
right, which is a strange thing that happens to people in shock
sometimes. Say you were that kid, you could say how it was, because once
you woke up lying in the gym office in high school and asked what had
happened. They explained how you tried something on the parallel bars
and fell on your head. You understood exactly, though you couldn’t
remember falling. Then a minute later you asked again what had happened
and they told you. You understood it. And a minute later … forty-one
times they told you, and you understood. It was just that no matter how
many times they pushed it into your head, it wouldn’t stick there; but
all the while you _knew_ that your head would start working again in
time. And in time it did.… Of course, if you were that kid, always
explaining things to people and to yourself, you wouldn’t want to bother
the sick man with it now.

Look what you’ve done already, making him send you away with that angry
shrug of the mind (which, with the eyes, are the only things which will
move just now). The motionless effort costs him a wave of nausea. He has
felt seasick before but he has never _been_ seasick, and the formula for
that is to keep your eyes on the horizon and stay busy. Now! Then he’d
better get busy—now; for there’s one place especially not to be seasick
in, and that’s locked up in a pressure suit. Now!

So he busies himself as best he can, with the seascape, landscape, sky.
He lies on high ground, his head propped on a vertical wall of black
rock. There is another such outcrop before him, whip-topped with white
sand and with smooth flat sand. Beyond and down is valley, salt-flat,
estuary; he cannot yet be sure. He is sure of the line of footprints,
which begin behind him, pass to his left, disappear in the outcrop
shadows, and reappear beyond to vanish at last into the shadows of the
valley.

Stretched across the sky is old mourning-cloth, with starlight burning
holes in it, and between the holes the black is absolute—wintertime,
mountaintop sky-black.

(Far off on the horizon within himself, he sees the swell and crest of
approaching nausea; he counters with an undertow of weakness, which
meets and rounds and settles the wave before it can break. Get busier.
Now.)

Burst in on him, then, with the X-15 model. That’ll get him. Hey, how
about this for a gimmick? Get too high for the thin air to give you any
control, you have these little jets in the wingtips, see? and on the
sides of the empennage: bank, roll, yaw, whatever, with squirts of
compressed air.

But the sick man curls his sick lip: oh, git, kid, git, will you?—that
has nothing to do with the sea. So you git.

Out and out the sick man forces his view, etching all he sees with a
meticulous intensity, as if it might be his charge, one day, to
duplicate all this. To his left is only starlit sea, windless. In front
of him across the valley, rounded hills with dim white epaulettes of
light. To his right, the jutting corner of the black wall against which
his helmet rests. (He thinks the distant moundings of nausea becalmed,
but he will not look yet.) So he scans the sky, black and bright,
calling Sirius, calling Pleiades, Polaris, Ursa Minor, calling
that … that … Why, it _moves_. Watch it: yes, it moves! It is a fleck of
light, seeming to be wrinkled, fissured, rather like a chip of boiled
cauliflower in the sky. (Of course, he knows better than to trust his
own eyes just now.) But that movement …

As a child he had stood on cold sand in a frosty Cape Cod evening,
watching Sputnik’s steady spark rise out of the haze (madly, dawning a
little north of west); and after that he had sleeplessly wound special
coils for his receiver, risked his life restringing high antennas, all
for the brief capture of an unreadable _tweetle-eep-tweetle_ in his
earphones from Vanguard, Explorer, Lunik, Discoverer, Mercury. He knew
them all (well, some people collect match-covers, stamps) and he knew
especially that unmistakable steady sliding in the sky.

This moving fleck was a satellite, and in a moment, motionless,
uninstrumented but for his chronometer and his part-brain, he will know
which one. (He is grateful beyond expression—without that sliding chip
of light, there were only those footprints, those wandering footprints,
to tell a man he was not alone in the world.)

Say you were a kid, eager and challengeable and more than a little
bright, you might in a day or so work out a way to measure the period of
a satellite with nothing but a timepiece and a brain; you might
eventually see that the shadow in the rocks ahead had been there from
the first only because of the light from the rising satellite. Now if
you check the time exactly at the moment when the shadow on the sand is
equal to the height of the outcrop, and time it again when the light is
at the zenith and the shadow gone, you will multiply this number of
minutes by 8—think why, now: horizon to zenith is one-fourth of the
orbit, give or take a little, and halfway up the sky is half that
quarter—and you will then know this satellite’s period. You know all the
periods—ninety minutes, two, two-and-a-half hours; with that and the
appearance of this bird, you’ll find out which one it is.

But if you were that kid, eager or resourceful or whatever, you wouldn’t
jabber about it to the sick man, for not only does he not want to be
bothered with you, he’s thought of all that long since and is even now
watching the shadows for that triangular split second of measurement.
Now! His eyes drop to the face of his chronometer: 0400, near as makes
no never mind.

He has minutes to wait now—ten? … thirty? … twenty-three?—while this
baby moon eats up its slice of shadowpie; and that’s too bad, the
waiting, for though the inner sea is calm there are currents below,
shadows that shift and swim. Be busy. Be busy. He must not swim near
that great invisible amoeba, whatever happens: its first cold pseudopod
is even now reaching for the vitals.

Being a knowledgeable young fellow, not quite a kid any more, wanting to
help the sick man too, you want to tell him everything you know about
that cold-in-the-gut, that reaching invisible surrounding implacable
amoeba. You know all about it—listen, you want to yell at him, don’t let
that touch of cold bother you. Just know what it is, that’s all. Know
what it is that is touching your gut. You want to tell him, listen:

Listen, this is how you met the monster and dissected it. Listen, you
were skin-diving in the Grenadines, a hundred tropical shoal-water
islands; you had a new blue snorkel mask, the kind with face-plate and
breathing-tube all in one, and new blue flippers on your feet, and a new
blue spear-gun—all this new because you’d only begun, you see; you were
a beginner, aghast with pleasure at your easy intrusion into this
underwater otherworld. You’d been out in a boat, you were coming back,
you’d just reached the mouth of the little bay, you’d taken the notion
to swim the rest of the way. You’d said as much to the boys and slipped
into the warm silky water. You brought your gun.

Not far to go at all, but then beginners find wet distances deceiving.
For the first five minutes or so it was only delightful, the sun hot on
your back and the water so warm it seemed not to have any temperature at
all and you were flying. With your face under the water, your mask was
not so much attached as part of you, your wide blue flippers trod away
yards, your gun rode all but weightless in your hand, the taut rubber
sling making an occasional hum as your passage plucked it in the sunlit
green. In your ears crooned the breathy monotone of the snorkel tube,
and through the invisible disk of plate glass you saw wonders. The bay
was shallow—ten, twelve feet or so—and sandy, with great growths of
brain-, bone-, and fire-coral, intricate waving sea-fans, and fish—such
fish! Scarlet and green and aching azure, gold and rose and slate-color
studded with sparks of enamel-blue, pink and peach and silver. And that
_thing_ got into you, that … monster.

There were enemies in this otherworld: the sand-colored spotted
sea-snake with his big ugly head and turned-down mouth, who would not
retreat but lay watching the intruder pass; and the mottled moray with
jaws like bolt-cutters; and somewhere around, certainly, the barracuda
with his undershot face and teeth turned inward so that he must take
away whatever he might strike. There were urchins—the plump white
sea-egg with its thick fur of sharp quills and the black ones with the
long slender spines that would break off in unwary flesh and fester
there for weeks; and file-fish and stone-fish with their poisoned barbs
and lethal meat; and the stingaree who could drive his spike through a
leg bone. Yet these were not _monsters_, and could not matter to you,
the invader churning along above them all. For you were above them in so
many ways—armed, rational, comforted by the close shore (ahead the
beach, the rocks on each side) and by the presence of the boat not too
far behind. Yet you were … attacked.

At first it was uneasiness, not pressing, but pervasive, a contact quite
as intimate as that of the sea; you were sheathed in it. And also there
was the touch—the cold inward contact. Aware of it at last, you laughed:
for Pete’s sake, what’s there to be scared of?

The monster, the amoeba.

You raised your head and looked back in air. The boat had edged in to
the cliff at the right; someone was giving a last poke around for
lobster. You waved at the boat; it was your gun you waved, and emerging
from the water it gained its latent ounces so that you sank a bit, and
as if you had no snorkel on, you tipped your head back to get a breath.
But tipping your head back plunged the end of the tube under water; the
valve closed; you drew in a hard lungful of nothing at all. You dropped
your face under; up came the tube; you got your air, and along with it a
bullet of seawater which struck you somewhere inside the throat. You
coughed it out and floundered, sobbing as you sucked in air, inflating
your chest until it hurt, and the air you got seemed no good, no good at
all, a worthless devitalized inert gas.

You clenched your teeth and headed for the beach, kicking strongly and
knowing it was the right thing to do; and then below and to the right
you saw a great bulk mounding up out of the sand floor of the sea. You
knew it was only the reef, rocks and coral and weed, but the sight of it
made you scream; you didn’t care what you knew. You turned hard left to
avoid it, fought by as if it would reach for you, and you couldn’t get
air, couldn’t get air, for all the unobstructed hooting of your snorkel
tube. You couldn’t bear the mask, suddenly, not for another second, so
you shoved it upward clear of your mouth and rolled over, floating on
your back and opening your mouth to the sky and breathing with a
quacking noise.

It was then and there that the monster well and truly engulfed you,
mantling you round and about within itself—formless, borderless, the
illimitable amoeba. The beach, mere yards away, and the rocky arms of
the bay, and the not-too-distant boat—these you could identify but no
longer distinguish, for they were all one and the same thing … the thing
called unreachable.

You fought that way for a time, on your back, dangling the gun under and
behind you and straining to get enough warm sun-stained air into your
chest. And in time some particles of sanity began to swirl in the roil
of your mind, and to dissolve and tint it. The air pumping in and out of
your square-grinned frightened mouth began to be meaningful at last, and
the monster relaxed away from you.

You took stock, saw surf, beach, a leaning tree. You felt the new scend
of your body as the rollers humped to become breakers. Only a dozen firm
kicks brought you to where you could roll over and double up; your shin
struck coral with a lovely agony and you stood in foam and waded ashore.
You gained the wet sand, hard sand, and ultimately, with two more paces
powered by bravado, you crossed high-water mark and lay in the dry sand,
unable to move.

You lay in the sand, and before you were able to move or to think, you
were able to feel a triumph—a triumph because you were alive and knew
that much without thinking at all.

When you were able to think, your first thought was of the gun, and the
first move you were able to make was to let go at last of the thing. You
had nearly died because you had not let it go before; without it you
would not have been burdened and you would not have panicked. You had
(you began to understand) kept it because someone else would have had to
retrieve it—easily enough—and you could not have stood the laughter. You
had almost died because They might laugh at you.

This was the beginning of the dissection, analysis, study of the
monster. It began then; it had never finished. Some of what you had
learned from it was merely important; some of the rest—vital.

You had learned, for example, never to swim farther with a snorkel than
you could swim back without one. You learned never to burden yourself
with the unnecessary in an emergency: even a hand or a foot might be as
expendable as a gun; pride was expendable, dignity was. You learned
never to dive alone, even if They laugh at you, even if you have to
shoot a fish yourself and say afterward “we” shot it. Most of all, you
learned that fear has many fingers, and one of them—a simple one, made
of too great a concentration of carbon dioxide in your blood, as from
too-rapid breathing in and out of the same tube—is not really fear at
all but feels like fear, and can turn into panic and kill you.

Listen, you want to say, listen, there isn’t anything wrong with such an
experience or with all the study it leads to, because a man who can
learn enough from it could become fit enough, cautious enough,
foresighted, unafraid, modest, teachable enough to be chosen, to be
qualified for.…

You lose the thought, or turn it away, because the sick man feels that
cold touch deep inside, feels it right now, feels it beyond ignoring,
above and beyond anything that you, with all your experience and
certainty, could explain to him even if he would listen, which he won’t.
Make him, then; tell him the cold touch is some simple explainable thing
like anoxia, like gladness even: some triumph that he will be able to
appreciate when his head is working right again.

Triumph? Here he’s alive after … whatever it is, and that doesn’t seem
to be triumph enough, though it was in the Grenadines, and that other
time, when he got the bends, saved his own life, saved two other lives.
Now, somehow, it’s not the same: there seems to be a reason why just
being alive afterward isn’t a triumph.

Why not triumph? Because not twelve, not twenty, not even thirty minutes
is it taking the satellite to complete its eighth-of-an-orbit: fifty
minutes are gone, and still there’s a slice of shadow yonder. It is
this, this which is placing the cold finger upon his heart, and he
doesn’t know why, he doesn’t know why, he will not know why; he is
afraid he shall when his head is working again.…

Oh, where’s the kid? Where is any way to busy the mind, apply it to
something, anything else but the watchhand which outruns the moon? Here,
kid: come over here—what you got there?

If you were the kid, then you’d forgive everything and hunker down with
your new model, not a toy, not a helicopter or a rocket-plane, but the
big one, the one that looks like an overgrown cartridge. It’s so big,
even as a model, that even an angry sick man wouldn’t call it a toy. A
giant cartridge, but watch: the lower four-fifths is Alpha—all
muscle—over a million pounds thrust. (Snap it off, throw it away.) Half
the rest is Beta—all brains—it puts you on your way. (Snap it off, throw
it away.) And now look at the polished fraction which is left. Touch a
control somewhere and see—see? it has wings—wide triangular wings. This
is Gamma, the one with wings, and on its back is a small sausage; it is
a moth with a sausage on its back. The sausage (click! it comes free) is
Delta. Delta is the last, the smallest: Delta is the way home.

What will they think of next? Quite a toy. Quite a toy. Beat it, kid.
The satellite is almost overhead, the sliver of shadow
going—going—almost gone and … gone.

Check: 0459. Fifty-nine minutes? give or take a few. Times
eight … 472 … is, uh, 7 hours 52 minutes.

Seven hours fifty-two minutes? Why, there isn’t a satellite round earth
with a period like that. In all the solar system there’s only …

The cold finger turns fierce, implacable.

The east is paling and the sick man turns to it, wanting the light, the
sun, an end to questions whose answers couldn’t be looked upon. The sea
stretches endlessly out to the growing light, and endlessly, somewhere
out of sight, the surf roars. The paling east bleaches the sandy
hilltops and throws the line of footprints into aching relief. That
would be the buddy, the sick man knows, gone for help. He cannot at the
moment recall who the buddy is, but in time he will, and meanwhile the
footprints make him less alone.

The sun’s upper rim thrusts itself above the horizon with a flash of
green, instantly gone. There is no dawn, just the green flash and then a
clear white blast of unequivocal sunup. The sea could not be whiter,
more still, if it were frozen and snow-blanketed. In the west, stars
still blaze, and overhead the crinkled satellite is scarcely abashed by
the growing light. A formless jumble in the valley below begins to
resolve itself into a sort of tent-city, or installation of some kind,
with tubelike and sail-like buildings. This would have meaning for the
sick man if his head were working right. Soon, it would. Will. (Oh …)

The sea, out on the horizon just under the rising sun, is behaving
strangely, for in that place where properly belongs a pool of unbearable
brightness, there is instead a notch of brown. It is as if the white
fire of the sun is drinking dry the sea—for look, look! the notch
becomes a bow and the bow a crescent, racing ahead of the sunlight,
white sea ahead of it and behind it a cocoa-dry stain spreading across
and down toward where he watches.

Beside the finger of fear which lies on him, another finger places
itself, and another, making ready for that clutch, that grip, that
ultimate insane squeeze of panic. Yet beyond that again, past that
squeeze when it comes, to be savored if the squeeze is only fear and not
panic, lies triumph—triumph, and a glory. It is perhaps this which
constitutes his whole battle: to fit himself, prepare himself to bear
the utmost that fear could do, for if he can do that, there is a triumph
on the other side. But … not yet. Please, not yet awhile.

Something flies (or flew, or will fly—he is a little confused on this
point) toward him, from the far right where the stars still shine. It is
not a bird and it is unlike any aircraft on earth, for the aerodynamics
are wrong. Wings so wide and so fragile would be useless, would melt and
tear away in any of earth’s atmosphere but the outer fringes. He sees
then (because he prefers to see it so) that it is the kid’s model, or
part of it, and for a toy it does very well indeed.

It is the part called Gamma, and it glides in, balancing, parallels the
sand and holds away, holds away slowing, then, settles, all in slow
motion, throwing up graceful sheet-fountains of fine sand from its
skids. And it runs along the ground for an impossible distance, letting
down its weight by the ounce and stingily the ounce, until _look out_
until a skid _look out_ fits itself into a bridged crevasse _look out,
look out!_ and still moving on, it settles down to the struts. Gamma
then, tired, digs her wide left wingtip carefully into the racing sand,
digs it in hard; and as the wing breaks off, Gamma slews, sidles, slides
slowly, pointing her other triangular tentlike wing at the sky, and
broadside crushes into the rocks at the valley’s end.

As she rolls smashing over, there breaks from her broad back the
sausage, the little Delta, which somersaults away to break its back upon
the rocks, and through the broken hull spill smashed shards of graphite
from the moderator of her power-pile. _Look out! Look out!_ and at the
same instant from the finally checked mass of Gamma there explodes a
doll, which slides and tumbles into the sand, into the rocks and smashed
hot graphite from the wreck of Delta.

The sick man numbly watches this toy destroy itself: what will they
think of next?—and with a gelid horror prays at the doll lying in the
raging rubble of the atomic pile: _don’t stay there, man—get away! get
away! that’s hot, you know?_ But it seems like a night and a day and
half another night before the doll staggers to its feet and, clumsy in
its pressure-suit, runs away up the valleyside, climbs a sand-topped
outcrop, slips, falls, lies under a slow cascade of cold ancient sand
until, but for an arm and the helmet, it is buried.

The sun is high now, high enough to show the sea is not a sea, but brown
plain with the frost burned off it, as now it burns away from the hills,
diffusing in air and blurring the edges of the sun’s disk, so that in a
very few minutes there is no sun at all, but only a glare in the east.
Then the valley below loses its shadows, and, like an arrangement in a
diorama, reveals the form and nature of the wreckage below: no tent city
this, no installation, but the true real ruin of Gamma and the
eviscerated hulk of Delta. (Alpha was the muscle, Beta the brain; Gamma
was a bird, but Delta, Delta was the way home.)

And from it stretches the line of footprints, to and by the sick man,
above to the bluff, and gone with the sandslide which had buried him
there. Whose footprints?

He knows whose, whether or not he knows that he knows, or wants to or
not. He knows what satellite has (give or take a bit) a period like that
(want it exactly?—it’s 7.66 hours). He knows what world has such a
night, and such a frosty glare by day. He knows these things as he knows
how spilled radioactives will pour the crash and mutter of surf into a
man’s earphones.

Say you were that kid: say, instead, at last, that you are the sick man,
for they are the same; surely then you can understand why of all things,
even while shattered, shocked, sick with radiation calculated (leaving)
radiation computed (arriving) and radiation past all bearing (lying in
the wreckage of Delta) you would want to think of the sea. For no farmer
who fingers the soil with love and knowledge, no poet who sings of it,
artist, contractor, engineer, even child bursting into tears at the
inexpressible beauty of a field of daffodils—none of these is as
intimate with Earth as those who live on, live with, breathe and drift
in its seas. So of these things you must think; with these you must
dwell until you are less sick and more ready to face the truth.

The truth, then, is that the satellite fading here is Phobos, that those
footprints are your own, that there is no sea here, that you have
crashed and are killed and will in a moment be dead. The cold hand ready
to squeeze and still your heart is not anoxia or even fear, it is death.
Now, if there is something more important than this, now is the time for
it to show itself.

The sick man looks at the line of his own footprints, which testify that
he is alone, and at the wreckage below, which states that there is no
way back, and at the white east and the mottled west and the paling
flecklike satellite above. Surf sounds in his ears. He hears his pumps.
He hears what is left of his breathing. The cold clamps down and folds
him round past measuring, past all limit.

Then he speaks, cries out: then with joy he takes his triumph at the
other side of death, as one takes a great fish, as one completes a
skilled and mighty task, rebalances at the end of some great daring
leap; and as he used to say “we shot a fish” he uses no “I”:

“God,” he cries, dying on Mars, “God, we made it!”



THE MAN WHO FIGURED EVERYTHING


This is about Jim Conlin the Badlands Bookkeeper. He was, according to
the journals of the time, a terror, a menace, and a scourge. He was, in
the flesh, a mild man, young and balding early, with diffident
horizontal lines across his brow.

He hid in the hills with his half-dozen riders, all but one of whom
outweighed him, but then that one was only a three-quarter breed Nez
Perce, and hardly counted. These men, each to his taste, fought and
gambled, drank and wenched, always providing they had Jim Conlin’s
advance permission and pursued the hobby somewhere away from Jim
Conlin’s hideout. A long way away. There was a town, Dead Mole Spring,
eight miles away as the crow flies, where nobody had ever seen Conlin or
any of his crew—a good example of the way the Bookkeeper of the Badlands
arranged things.

Jim Conlin figured. He figured everything, the Bookkeeper did. He never
moved until he was ready, and when he was ready, it was altogether. In
some sleepy mountain town, just when the marshal was out and the sheriff
drunk, and the bank heavy with cowpokes’ pay and prospectors’ dust, Jim
Conlin’s men would whirl up out of the ground like dust devils and be
gone like smoke, the gold with them.

The only similarity between one job and another was that element of
perfect planning, perfect timing—the only clue, most of the time, as to
who the robbers were. Unless, of course, Conlin wanted it otherwise,
like the time he took the Rocky Summit Bank three times in one week,
just because everybody was so positive he wouldn’t be back.

He would have been caught for sure the time rumors got around that he
was going to rob the express between Elwood and Casson’s Quarry; the
train was loaded with law and the tracks lined on both sides with one of
the biggest posses the West had ever seen, which was fine with Conlin,
who was busy at the time robbing another train on another railroad.

He would certainly be remembered in large type, like Butch Cassidy and
the James boys, if it were not for his concentration on fine detail—this
got him only into fine print. As a man, he was colorless to the point of
invisibility; as a desperado he was too methodical to be remembered.
Probably the largest two reasons his reputation has faded with the
newspapers of his day were these: he never killed a lawman, and he was
never caught.

There came one night to Jim Conlin’s hideout, Arch Scott, invited and
escorted. Scott had something of a reputation locally: cautious, sober,
with special skills in safes and lockboxes. He could use a gun, and
didn’t, which was a high recommendation to the Bookkeeper; and Scott’s
ability to do nine consecutive jobs with the methods of nine different
people clinched it.

Although the Bookkeeper occasionally took on a brace or two of drifters
for special jobs, letting them go afterwards, he liked to keep a
half-dozen regulars with him; and there was a vacancy just now, one
Farley Moore having succumbed to romance. (That was Conlin’s name for
it; actually it was tetanus, contracted after a Rocky Summit housewife,
mistaken for a doxie by Moore, removed his ear with an iron skillet.)

So Conlin gave Arch Scott his guided tour and his most careful
examination, introducing him around, watching him, making his estimate.
He liked Scott—liked him, that is, the way a man likes a well-made
saddle or a clean rifle. The Bookkeeper had human feelings, but he had a
place for them, and he kept them all there. Which introduces Loretta
Harper.

She was the only woman permitted at the hideout, except for a few squaws
who washed clothes and swept out. Conlin had found her working in a
place she was glad to get out of—especially with a man who knew enough
about her to ask no questions and saw to it that she got more of the
things she liked than she could hope for working in town. He had
something for all her hungers but one, and that one was beyond his
comprehension. It was beyond hers, too, until Arch Scott came.

“This here’s Loretta,” Conlin said when he brought Scott in, and Scott
saw a carving come to life, silk and ivory and ice, as out of place here
as a leaf from _Godey’s Lady’s Book_ tacked to a haybarn; and Loretta
saw a neat man with heavy shoulders and good teeth and eyes you couldn’t
keep secrets from.

And that should have been that. It would have been, as far as Arch was
concerned. He was there on business, and business came first. And
Loretta felt nothing, just then; Jim Conlin’s men came and went and his
steady crew was always there. This was another one, only another one. As
Conlin and Scott left she turned back to her mirror, and if anyone had
asked her, she probably wouldn’t have remembered the new man’s name.

Conlin and Arch Scott went down the mountain for fifty yards or so to
the cabin and went in. “Henry Little Hawk,” said Conlin, nodding at the
slight figure squatting by the door.

“Howdy,” said Scott. “I’m …”

“Yuh,” grunted the little man. He looked like an animated piece of
mahogany, and seemed to be composed mainly of eyebrows, nose, and sharp
shinbones.

Conlin chuckled. “He knows who you are. He’s the one found you for me.
Or anyway, he’s the one who found out it was really you who did the jobs
you say you done. He sees everything and everybody, Henry does, and
nobody sees him.” He went to the back wall of the cabin and put his boot
on it. It swung aside. “Havin’ Henry around’s like having your eyes out
on stalks forty mile long,” he said, motioning Scott through the
opening, then closing it. “Only a misfit Nez Perce breed, but God what a
memory! Look at a town he never saw before, ride all night, draw you a
map so fine you could go there and jump over a yaller dog blindfold.”

They were standing at one end of a section mine tunnel, with the wooden
cabin wall behind them and a rockfall at the other end. The long room
was fitted out like a bunkhouse, but with a fire in the center, its
smoke curling upward to be lost in a fissure overhead. All evidence of
the old mine workings had been carefully removed from the outside and
the weather-beaten cabin, scarcely large enough for two men,
substituted. Any posseman willing to believe the evidence of his own
eyes would call you a liar if you told him you had seen a bunch the size
of Conlin’s disappear into this hillside. Not that a posse had ever been
within miles of this place, of course.

“Can sleep eleven here in a pinch,” Conlin said. “Ain’t but four
now—Henry, he don’t bunk here. Suit you?”

Scott swept the place with a glance. “Fine, Conlin. I slept in worse and
paid money for it. Where’s the …”

He was interrupted by a blast of language, English and Spanish, profane
and obscene, packed tight as grapeshot and twice as loud. A tall man,
hidden until now by the end bunks, sprang to his feet, snatching a
coiled bullwhip from a peg on the rock wall. He was a blaze of color and
fancywork, Mexican weaving and tooled leather. On his shoulder blades,
held by an elaborately braided thong, perched a hand-blocked silken felt
worth six months of a cowpoke’s pay.

He shook out the whip and brought it whistling back, and in that split
second Conlin was behind him, grasping the lash. The whip flicked out of
the man’s hand and Scott, still standing by the wooden wall, had to step
aside to avoid the loaded handle.

“Now, Al, you know better’n that,” said Conlin quietly. He drew up
beside the bunks and looked down. A blanket was spread on the floor, and
on it was gold money and a deck of cards. A second giant knelt by the
blanket, scowling. His eyes were red, very small, very wide apart, and
at the moment full of kill. Conlin’s appearance had arrested him halfway
to his feet with a nickel-plated .45 halfway out. He came to his feet
now, but slowly, and when he stopped moving, his gun was holstered and
his hand clear of it.

The man with the fancy hat, Al, began to splutter at Conlin, something
about wart-hogs, something about an inside straight, something in
Spanish. Conlin shook his head gently, stooped, and picked up most of
the cards. Deftly he stacked them, cut them, and tore the pack in two,
letting the pieces flutter to the ground.

The two big men watched the pieces fall. The red-eyed man bit his lower
lip silently with square yellow teeth. The other one ran out of splutter
and simply stood there, breathing hard. If Arch Scott expected anything
else to happen, he was disappointed. Conlin motioned to him and said,
“Scott, this here’s Big Ike Friend.” The red-eyed man glowered at the
stranger. “And Al Coe.”

“Arch Scott. Howdy.”

“Howdy,” Coe grunted. He walked past the others and went for his whip.
He came back, coiling it as he walked, not looking at anybody, and hung
it on the peg. “Seen you before, Scott,” he said with his back turned.

“Don’t think so.”

“Ever down Taos way, or ’Dobe?”

“I come from the Dakotas,” said Arch Scott quickly, “where folks don’t
ask questions.”

Big Ike Friend produced a harsh brief snicker from the depths of his
flat nose.

“Tell you something,” said Conlin in a voice so mild in the sudden
tension that Scott nearly jumped with shock. “We don’t fight among
ourselves here. Anybody wants to rassle, go pick on a stranger some
place else. You ain’t learned that, Scott, and you and Big Ike forgot
it, I guess, Al. We don’t gamble here, we don’t drink—not enough to get
drunk on anyways—and there ain’t no women allowed. I got nothing against
them three things, but they’re the three best reasons for fightin’, and
that kind of fightin’ is one thing I ain’t got time to keep books on.
Scott, you need anything, you ask Big Ike or Al Coe here. I’m going back
to the house.”

And he did, without so much as a good night, leaving all the makings of
a three-sided donnybrook. But then Arch Scott laughed—not at the two big
men, but in an indefinable way with them, so that he was no longer a
stranger, but part of a crew which had just seen a hundred and forty
pounds of mild logic putting out a fire. Big Ike laughed too; Al Coe did
not, but he relaxed visibly.

“Where do I bunk?” Scott asked.

Big Ike pointed out the empties. Scott selected one and sat down on it,
looking quizzically at the others. “How does he do it?”

“By bein’ right,” said Al Coe reluctantly.

“Lots of hombres go around being right, nobody listens,” said Big Ike.

“Those are the guys that don’t pay off,” said Coe. “Bein’ right is
nothin’ by itself.”

And there it was, in as neat a nutshell as anyone could pack it. There’s
no point in disagreeing with a man who’s always right, who also put
money in your sock.

Arch Scott fell asleep that night knowing he wouldn’t be bothered.

The horses were corralled in a narrow dry gulch a quarter of a mile
away, visible from two places—inside, and straight up. Like the rest of
the spread, it was only another scar on the hillside.

Conlin went down there in the morning with Loretta, to cut out a gentle
horse for her. It was early, but Arch Scott was already up and about,
standing just inside the narrow throat of the gulch, his hands in the
back pockets of his Levi’s and his hat on the back of his head.
“Morning.”

Conlin nodded to him. Loretta didn’t say anything. Scott glanced at her,
then took his hands out of his pockets and removed his hat. His
tardiness was understandable. When Loretta rode, the carven goddess was
folded up and put away. She wore Levi’s and a shirt and a soft leather
vest, and her bright hair was hidden under a wide-brimmed man’s hat; and
from twenty paces she looked like a country boy out to bark squirrels,
which was the idea.

She stood by the rails near Scott and waited while Conlin went in with a
bridle over his shoulder and a rope on one arm. Scott glanced at her
once, but she seemed to be watching Conlin, so he said nothing. He
watched Conlin too, and he liked what he saw.

The Bookkeeper did what he had to do without waste motion, and better
than anyone he might have ordered to do it for him. He took a roan
gelding on the first cast, reeled him in, and had the rope off and the
bridle on in what looked like one movement. He led the animal to a shed
by the rocky wall of the cut and went in for a saddle.

“Scott.”

Arch looked at the woman. She had not moved, and was certainly not
looking his way. Her voice had been just loud enough to reach him. He
sensed that this was no casual approach to a casual conversation, so he
took her cue and stayed where he was. “Ma’am?”

“Waterhole called Green Spring,” she said, hardly moving her lips. In
spite of its softness she had a surprisingly full voice. “Find it. Be
there at two o’clock.” Before he could answer or acknowledge, she had
slipped through the rails and was walking toward Conlin.

He watched her mount and wheel the horse. He gathered his wits and
dropped the bars for her as she rode out. She passed as if he did not
exist. Scott replaced the bars without looking after her.

“We’re going out on a little job today,” Conlin told him when he came
up.

“We are?”

“We are—Henry and me and Al and Big Ike. Moko and Gus, that’s the two
you ain’t met yet, they’re waiting for us.”

“I do something wrong?”

Conlin seemed to think the question quite natural. “Hardly had a chance
yet, have you?”

“ ‘What do you want me to do while you’re out?”

Conlin swept out his arm in a wide circular motion. “Smell out this
spread. I want you to memorize every rock and bush and cut and hogback
within ten miles of here. They say a couple big glaciers carved up this
country, Scott—I wouldn’t know about that myself; but whoever done it
was working for us. You’ll see. You’ll find out that this country can
lose a Injun tracker with a pack o’ hounds, if you know where to go.
Nobody ever trailed us in here, and nobody’s about to, because every man
of us comes and goes a different way and knows a hundred more. You got
to get to know this country like the inside of your front teeth.”

“All right,” Scott said.

Conlin laughed at his expression. “Don’t get yourself so damn’
disappointed, Scott. You’re about to make the easiest money you’ll ever
make with us. You get a half share of everything we make, just for
stayin’ here. The other boys get one share each. I get two and a half.
Your pay is free and clear. I got all the expenses. Understand?”

“Sounds fine to me.”

“Long as you understand, there ain’t nothin’ to argue about, with me or
anybody. You want to know anything, don’t wonder and don’t start rumors.
Ask.”

“All right,” said Scott. He wet his lips. “Where you going today?”

Conlin laughed again. “He wants to know where we’re goin’, Henry.”

From midair, apparently, came an amused grunt. Scott whirled and looked
right, looked left, then looked up. Henry Little Hawk squatted on a rock
ledge ten feet off the ground, toasting his sharp nose and his sharper
shinbones in the morning sun. “God!” said Scott. “I never saw him up
there.”

“I told you before. Henry goes everywhere, nobody ever sees him.”

Scott looked again at the little breed, who was slowly coming to life,
crabbing sidewise down the bluff. Had he heard Loretta speak to him? And
if so—what? Was this her hard luck, or Scott’s, or Conlin’s? Or maybe it
didn’t matter. Henry Little Hawk wouldn’t be around at two this
afternoon anyway.

Scott wrenched his mind away from these thoughts and said, “So where you
say you’re going?”

Again that amused syllable from Henry Little Hawk. Conlin said, “Tell
you what, you ask Big Ike.” He turned away and went back to the saddle
shed. Scott watched him rope another horse and then went slowly back to
the hidden bunkhouse. Al Coe was sitting at a deal table with the guts
of one of his pearl-handled .45s spread out on a clean white cloth. For
all his fancy-work, this man knew his weapons and treated them right.
“Big Ike around?”

“Down to the corral,” said Coe.

“I was just there.”

Coe shrugged.

“Going to use those today,” said Scott about the guns. It was the kind
of statement that is a question.

Coe shrugged again and went on working.

Scott said suddenly, “Do I bother you?”

Coe seemed not to hear at all; and then Scott noticed his bands had
stopped moving. He sat like that for a long moment, then slowly turned a
pair of frozen eyes to take in the newcomer, from his hat to his hands,
his holster, the plain strong boot on a bench, the knee on which Scott’s
crossed forearms rested. In a long, easy half whisper Al Coe said
“No-o-o …” Scott might have said it the same way if someone had asked
him if he was afraid of mice.

Scott smiled and said, “Too bad.” He straightened up and went out, not
hurrying. He knew that something had started that would have to be
finished, and he regretted it; there were plenty of other things to
worry him. Being liked or disliked by a jaybird like Al Coe didn’t
matter; just why, though, might matter very much. One possible reason
might matter so much that Arch Scott would wind up dead.

Outside he watched a squaw, a misplaced Pueblo, laboring up the hill
toward him from the ramshackle cookhouse, carrying two buckets of what
had to be hot breakfast. From the direction of the corral he saw Big Ike
swinging along the hillside. Scott let the squaw go on inside and stood
where he was, though his stomach wanted to follow her; he was hungry and
those buckets smelled good. “Mornin’,” he said to the big man when he
came up.

Big Ike nodded. Scott said, “Was down to the corral a while back, talked
to Conlin.”

“Talked to Conlin, did you?”

“Said you were ridin’ out today.”

“Said that, did he?”

“Asked him where to, he said you’d tell me.”

“No, he didn’t,” said Big Ike. He would have gone on inside, but Scott
caught his elbow. Big Ike stopped, freed his arm, and slowly wiped it
with his other hand, as if Scott had left mud on it.

Scott said, “You don’t want to tell me, Ike, say so.”

Big Ike looked surprised. “Hell,” he said placatingly, “don’t go jumping
salty. I wasn’t there, but I bet a empty ca’tridge to a dollar that
Conlin didn’t say no such a thing.” As Scott’s eyes narrowed he
delivered up a surprising, jovial grin and held up both his hands. “Tell
you why. Ain’t none of us knows where we’re goin’ till we git there.
Conlin he always works like that.”

“So why the hell didn’t he say so?”

“You know as much about that as I do. He had a reason—he figures
everything. Maybe he just wanted you to remember this special.”

“The son!” said Scott, rueful and admiring.

“Yeah, he got his ways o’ doin’ things,” chuckled Big Ike. “Now, what
was it he reely said?”

“You’re right,” said Scott. “All he said was, if I want to know where
you’re ridin’ today, ask Big Ike. He didn’t say you’d tell me.”

“He didn’t even say I knew. Come on in and eat. You get a little tetchy
when you’re hungry, I can see that.”

They went in to the buckwheat cakes and muscular black coffee the squaw
had laid out. Al Coe had nothing to say to him.

Everybody but Arch Scott rode out at about nine o’clock. They rode east,
but in these hills that could mean anything. Scott wished he knew where
they were going.

At noon he was picking his way up a creek, crossing and recrossing and
letting one of Conlin’s surefooted mountain ponies find the route. The
Green Spring, he had been told, was the source of this particular
stream. He had been told this by the Pueblo, who answered his question
in Spanish. He had pretended not to understand her; he didn’t want
anyone to add his knowledge of Spanish to Al Coe’s guess—if it was a
guess—about Taos. So she had answered in English and he was now on his
way. To what he didn’t know, but he had shaved first.

He had to leave the creek at an alder thicket and cut out to open
ground. He was well up into the hills now, and could see the rolling
country for miles. Ahead of him, a steep slope was capped by a rocky
cliff, mostly sheer, in some places overhanging. “That spring better be
under the cliff,” he muttered. “Sure won’t get over it without wings.”

He moved back to the stream when he could, and found it boiling along,
large as ever. Well, maybe it ran along the base of the cliff …

But it didn’t. He swore helplessly when he saw how it gushed right out
of the rock face and came brawling down the broken slope, with no sign
of a spring at all, let alone a green one.

Who was playing games? Loretta? The squaw?

Jokers like to watch their victims. He looked around carefully, angrily.
As far as the eye could determine, he had this cliff and this creek to
himself, and the whole world to boot.

He looked again at the cliff. Forty, fifty, some places sixty feet.
Sharp, almost solid rock, with a few scrubs of jack pine clinging to
cracks here and there, a spruce and hemlock at the foot. Up at the top,
like as not, it would be flat earth soft as delta country—a giant
terrace up to the mountain beyond.

Suddenly he saw an answer—the only possible way that the squaw could be
right and Loretta not playing games. Not practical jokes, anyway.

He cast up and back along the face of the cliff until he located a
possible break near the top—a long brown scar of spilled earth and the
clinging evergreen thick around it. He rode to the foot of it, found
shade for the pony, and started to climb a spruce which grew hard by the
sheer wall. Near the treetop was a tangle of limbs, part from his tree,
part from growth on the cliff. He thrashed his way across and began to
crawl upward.

In twenty minutes he was winded and furious. He had been a fly, a
mountain goat, a leapfrog, an inchworm. His fingernails were broken and
there was dirt in his mouth and grit under his right eyelid. But the
last fifteen feet or so were suddenly easy, with a dry wash he had not
been able to see before, angling gently up to the right, and he got up
it on his hands and knees, and at last reached level ground.

He didn’t attempt to get to his feet at first, but stayed there on all
fours with his head hanging, blowing like a foundered horse. When at
last he raised his head, there was the spring, waiting for him.

It was not, strictly speaking, a spring. Here, too, water appeared out
of a hillside. It ran only a hundred feet or so, then widened into a
pool overhung by trees and thick bushes. The banks were shadowed and
mossy, yet only a few feet away one could stand in the sun and look out
over seventy miles of country. Uphill from the pool, the slope became
steeper and ended in another, much more formidable cliff. The stream
evidently was underground most of the way, and came stitching out just
here, to make the pool and disappear again through some fissure in its
bottom.

Scott pushed his way through the underbrush to the edge of the water and
stood a while, thinking nothing in the world but that this was a mighty
nice place to be. Then he scanned the banks and the whole terrace and
hillside with a mountain man’s instinctive caution; and, seeing nobody,
he took off his sweaty shirt and undershirt and doused them in the
spring. He spread them on a flat rock to dry in the sun, then washed his
head and neck and drank a little. Then he lay down in the mossy shade
with his back against a boulder where he could see the whole pool with
one flick of the eyes, and settled himself to wait.

He was, he realized with pleasure, early; by the sun, it couldn’t be
much past one o’clock. From the back pocket of his Levi’s he extracted a
small leather-bound book, and began to read.

“I never read a book in my life.”

For the second time that day a disembodied voice spoke to him. Along
with the flash of astonishment, and just as strong, was a surge of
irritation. He bounced up and crouched, his eyes everywhere. That all
they do between jobs, he thought angrily, make a monkey out of a man?

Then he saw her, and the anger faded, leaving only amazement. She stood
in the split trunk of an Engelmann’s spruce, her hatless head like a
bright flower in the thick growth of mountain laurel which concealed the
cleft. He crossed his big arms on his bare chest and said with an odd
diffidence, “Beg pardon, ma’am; can’t say I saw you there. Let me get my
shirt.”

She waded through the laurel and stepped out on the bank. “I’ve seen the
like before,” she said. “Don’t put it on while it’s wet. What were you
readin’?”

“Cooper.”

“What’s a cooper?”

“It’s a book called _Last of the Mohicans_ by a man named Cooper.”

“I never read a book in my life,” she said again. She looked at the
volume where it lay by the boulder, at Scott, at the book again. She
seemed to be having a great deal of trouble getting used to the idea of
a man reading a book. “What do you read books for?”

Now he laughed, and she flared up at him, “You laughing at me?”

“Lord, no, ma’am. It’s just that nobody ever asked me that before.”

He looked at the still water for a moment, thinking. “Tell you what,
suppose you had a friend, he knew a whole lot more than you do. He could
tell you things about what people are like all over the world, the way
they live, everything. And what folks were like a hundred years ago or
even a thousand. He could tell you things that make your hair curl, lose
you sleep, or things that make you laugh.” He looked up at her swiftly,
and away. “Or cry.”

He kicked a pebble into the water and watched the sunlight break and
break, and heal. “More than that. Suppose you had a friend there waiting
for you anytime you wanted him, anyplace. He’d give you all he’s got or
any part of it, whenever you wanted it. And even more, you could shut
him up if you didn’t feel like listening. Or if he said something you
like, you could get him to say it over a hundred times, and he’d never
mind.”

He pointed at the book. “And all that you can put in your pocket.”
Suddenly he faced her. “Talk a heap, don’t I?”

“Yes,” she said. But there was no objection in the word.

They stood by the water, their eyes trapped. Scott, then Loretta, tugged
at the bond and for a moment couldn’t break it. They were laughing
embarrassedly, and laughing at their own laughter.

She sat down, and he went down beside her, close, but not too close.
“How many books’ve you read?” she asked.

“Lord, I don’t know.”

“I’d know.”

This time he did laugh at her. She looked up into his face without
anger. They fell silent again, until he said, “Ma’am …”

“Don’t call me that. Loretta’s my name.”

“Yes’m—Loretta. Thanks. Was going to say, I have two-three more books in
my bunkroll, you like to read them.” He waited a long time for her
answer, but there was none. “What’s the matter?”

“I guess,” she said with difficulty, “I better not borrow a book.”

He drew breath to ask her why not, but the strain in her voice warned
him away. Something here … Conlin didn’t like books, or didn’t like her
borrowing from the bunch … or maybe something which didn’t concern
Conlin at all. He could wait. It would come in time, if it was
important. “Any time you change your mind,” he said pleasantly.

She moved impatiently. “Don’t you wonder why I asked you to come up
here?”

He shook his head.

A series of expressions chased themselves across her smooth
face—puzzlement, anger, amusement. “I don’t know whether to get mad at
you for that,” she said.

“You shouldn’t.”

“All right, why did I tell you to meet me?”

“You wanted somebody to talk to,” he said immediately.

She made an odd sound, a short, surprised “Hm!” from her nostrils.
Reluctantly her eyes met his. “What do you mean?”

“What I said. Someone to talk to,” he said carefully. “All the time the
same faces saying the same things—Conlin talking business, Al Coe
bragging, and in between times,” he added shrewdly, “trying on fancy
clothes that nobody ever sees you in. Day after day … and you just
naturally got to talk to someone.”

“You see a lot!” she blurted, in a voice that should have been banter
but came out real.

“I say something wrong?”

She thought about it, honestly searching. Then, “No. You have a way
of … I don’t know. I don’t know how to say it, I’m just a … what I mean,
it’s hard to have secrets from you.”

Wisely he said nothing.

“I’ll tell you why I wouldn’t borrow a book,” she blurted. “You see, I
don’t read so good. If I tried to read one of your books I wouldn’t know
what the words meant, and you’d think I was ignorant, and that’s why.”
She leaped to her feet.

“Sure you’re ignorant,” he said, and smiled up at her, watching her face
pale and her nostrils arch. “You know what? I’m ignorant too. I can’t
run a printing press or play the vi’lin or tan a leather hide. You know
things I don’t know, you’ve been places I never heard of. Everybody’s
ignorant, Loretta, one way or another. Should I hold it against you you
never happened to read books?”

“I never heard a man talk like you do,” she breathed. “I never.”

He rose at last, and went and got the book. “Here.”

She hesitated, then took it. He said, “About the words, I’ll get you a
dictionary any time Conlin works a town big enough to find one in.
Meanwhile you can write ’em down, or mark them right in the book, and
ask me. Eight times out of ten I won’t know what they mean either, but
that’s all right; sooner or later the dictionary’ll straighten us out.”

He turned away from her; it was kindness not to look at her face just
then. He went to the flat rock and shook out his shirt. It was light and
warm from the sun, dry and clean. He put it on and went back to her. She
stood where he had left her, holding the book against her belt-buckle
with both hands. He said, “You didn’t climb no cliff to get here.”

“No, no, I didn’t,” she said absently. “Come on, I’ll show you how to
get back an easier way.”

“I have a pony down …”

“Come on.”

They walked southward along the ledge, away from the shadowed pool and
across a baking hell of broken rock. The terraced ground narrowed and
tilted downward as they rounded the face of the mountain. Just before it
turned into a rough trail there was an overhang, and in the shade the
roan was tethered.

Loretta swung up on it before Scott could put out a hand to help her,
and they continued down the trail. He glanced up at her occasionally;
she rode in silence, evidently wrestling with some internal problem. The
precipice at their left, which was the one he had climbed, gradually
became part of the sidehill, until at last it was fit for a two-legged
animal to walk on. She reined in.

“You cut back here, angling down,” she said. “You’ll be under the bluff
then. Just keep going till you get to your pony.”

There seemed to be something else that needed saying, but neither could
find words. He watched her until she vanished around the face of the
mountain, then he watched where she had been. At length he sighed and
turned back to find his pony and ride the creek-bed back to the hideout.

A hand on his shoulder, and up he came out of a shining dream of the New
Mexican sun glaring off a page of Fenimore Cooper; but it wasn’t print,
it was a picture of a face with clear skin, hungry with puzzlement. But
the thing was gone before he could grasp it. Then the hand touched him
again. “Scott!”

He opened his eyes. Someone bent over him. “It’s me, Conlin. Come on.”

Scott slid into his pants and followed the smaller man through the
firelit gloom of the bunkhouse and the falsebacked cabin. He wished he
could see Conlin’s face.

Conlin led the way to a spot on the trail a short way from the cabin.

“This’ll do,” he grunted. “Siddown.”

They sat on a rock in the shadows. Scott heard the faint scrape of
Conlin’s holster on the rock, and let himself yearn for his own Colt’s.

“How’d you make out?” he asked.

Conlin ignored the question completely. “What did you do with yourself
today?”

“Looked around.”

“Where at?”

“Yonder.”

“By yourself?”

“Mostly.”

“All right,” said Conlin, “I know you was with Loretta. I know why,
too.”

Scott remembered how quiet Conlin’s voice was when something ugly was
going on, like the time he’d walked into the poker game in the
bunkhouse. He tried to remember if this quiet was different from
Conlin’s usual quiet, and he couldn’t.

Conlin said, “It’s all right. You passed.”

“Passed?”

“Some men,” said Conlin, “make it to the cliff and turn back. Some bull
ahead the way you do and get to the spring. Some cast back and forth
along the mountain until they find the easy way. Once one of ’em got
lost doing that.”

Scott listened, so utterly surprised that he ceased trying to make sense
out of any of this.

“Those that get to the top are two kinds—the ones who make mistakes and
the ones who don’t. You didn’t.”

It seemed to be time for Scott to say something, so he asked, “You mean
you set that up for me, all of it?”

“For you, for everybody. There’s some hombres just got to make damn’
fools of theirselves first chance they get, and the time to find it out
is soon.”

“Seems to me …” But Scott was learning fast. This was Conlin’s method,
Conlin’s business.

“Spit it out, Scott.”

“None of my business, Jim.”

“That’s all right.”

“All right then. Ain’t you taking a long chance with Miss Loretta?”

Conlin laughed that quiet chuckle of his. “Not a partickle. First place,
ninety-nine out of a hundred wouldn’t chance tangling with me on the
very first day here. Second place, Loretta can take care of herself. If
she can’t do it with the back of her hand, she’ll do it with the
derringer she carries. Third place, if anybody should move too fast or
too rough for her, there’s Henry Little Hawk on the second bluff, up
over the spring, with a long bar’led Winchester and the damnedest eye I
seen yet. I seen Henry split a bullet on a knife blade and put out two
candles.”

Half consciously Scott stroked his breastbone, imagining it suddenly
slammed out between his shoulder blades before he could so much as hear
the shot. He said, “You figure everything. And I don’t know as I like
that much, Conlin. I got to tell you that.”

“You don’t have to like it,” said Conlin. “You didn’t have to come here
and you don’t have to stay.” The Bookkeeper paused, then said, “Here.”

A small heavy cloth bag fell into Scott’s slack hand. “All gold, four
hundred dollars. Your half share for today.”

Scott squeezed the bag and tossed it in his hand. Their shares—his and
Conlin’s—should come to $2400. The other shares—five if the breed got as
much as the rest—brought it to $6400. He whistled.

“Sure you’ll stay,” said Conlin.

“Why not?”

Conlin chuckled. “Now, Scott, somethin’ else. You might as well know
right from the start that Loretta don’t cotton to you much. You got too
much book-learnin’ and it scares her. But at the same time them books
can be a godsend. She got a lot of time on her hands—I can’t be keepin’
her happy every single minute—and if you can get her to readin’ books
you’ll be doin’ her a favor and me too. Reckon you might loan her some
book, somethin’ easy to start on?”

I already did! thought Scott, with a vague start of excitement; this was
coming through to him like a message from Loretta herself. He said, “If
she’ll take it.”

“She won’t at first,” Conlin said positively, “but you just nip her
along like a cow-dog till she’s headed right.”

“Can’t promise,” drawled Scott, “but I’ll try.”

There was a bang from the cabin—someone kicking open the false wall.
“Right on schedule,” said Conlin. “We all come back different ways, you
know. They’ll be driftin’ in for the next hour. You go on back to your
bunk. Next gold you get, you’ll work for.”

They got to their feet. “Come on, Henry,” said Conlin. And as Scott’s
heart leaped into his throat, what looked like a rock shadow detached
itself from the hillside and said, “Yup,” and became Henry Little Hawk.

It was all Scott could do to start for the bunkhouse with an appearance
of casualness. If Henry had been on that high bluff, he must have seen
Scott give a book to the girl. Now Loretta was telling Conlin how
reluctant she was. Was Conlin interested in exactly what lies were being
told? Or would the fact of a lie be enough for a bullet out of the dark?

It wasn’t until he was back in his bunk that he recaptured the picture
of Loretta after he had handed her the book—Loretta pressing it close to
her body.

That, he thought as he fell asleep again, is quite one hell of a woman.

The days sped by, easy to lose count of. Some of it was hard to take. On
a ranch there’s never enough time for all the work. At the hideout there
was never enough work. The broken-down buildings, weathered almost to
invisibility, had to stay the way they were. The horses could be cared
for, shod, watered, fed, and exercised just so much. Conlin permitted a
weird kind of poker, which started and finished with chips returned to
their box and all tallies canceled out; it was about as satisfying as
blowing the head off a glass of branch water. Target shooting and more
than a very little game hunting were out; on a still day the shots would
be heard for miles. Twice Conlin let men fight; they did it out in the
open, starting when Conlin said they could and knocking off when he felt
they’d popped off enough steam. It was all worth it, but it wasn’t easy.

Most afternoons Scott would amble up to the house and he and Loretta
would sit out on the front porch and bone over their books. They stayed
in plain sight, without ever discussing the matter first. Sometimes they
would sit silently for hours, saying nothing, until a character in
Loretta’s book “essayed” something or said something “uxorious,” at
which time she would yell for help.

Scott missed a dictionary; he was a reader, not a scholar, and many a
turn of phrase that made sense to him in context were beyond explanation
when he tried it word for word. But as the days went by, Loretta learned
to hurdle the unfamiliar instead of running into it head on, and
increasingly the books began to talk to her instead of fighting back.

Yet sometimes after a long silent period Scott would find himself
looking into her eyes. This always made them laugh, and they learned to
do it inwardly, without a sound and with barely a change of expression.
And sometimes they would look out across the valley and see figures
moving; if the figures happened to be Conlin and Henry Little Hawk,
things seemed to get said that could come out at no other time; but if
the bookkeeper and his little shadow were out of sight, it was sensible
to assume that one or the other was within hearing.

It was at one of these times, while Scott was peering down the valley to
be sure the group of men he saw breaking a horse included Conlin and the
breed, that he heard a slight and disturbing sound and turned quickly to
see Loretta crying. He leaned forward and took her hand. “What’s the
matter?”

She took a long time to find the words, and they came out as if they
were hard for her to use. “You,” she said. “The way you treat me. You
get up when I come in, you tip your hat. If I got something to say, you
wait, just like you wait to let me through a door first. All that. It
means …”

She had to tremble for a while, and then stop trembling. “Arch, don’t
you know where I come from, where Conlin found me, what I was doing,
what I am? Sometimes I think you … don’t know, and then I feel ashamed,
the way you … And sometimes I think you do know, and all those things
you do, they’re making fun of me.”

He kept his eye on the horses and let her have it out with herself. When
she was quiet, he said, “Loretta, time was when I wasn’t more housebroke
than a four-week mongrel dog. I used to let my dinner run off my chin
and I hadn’t the wit to say whoa. Now am I the same Arch Scott? Sure I
am. I grew up, that’s all, and I don’t do those things any more and
never will again. Are you going to slap my hand today because I stuck it
in a butter churn thirty years ago? Folks are what they are, not what
they were.”

“Arch,” was all she said; but you couldn’t write or say how it sounded;
you couldn’t paint a picture of how it looked.

There were other things said during these brief intervals of open speech
between them. Things about past jobs Conlin had pulled, about the way he
got his information. About the way he thought. And a good deal about his
men. His complete, yet scornful reliance on Henry Little Hawk; how he
trusted Big Ike Friend, and his thorough understanding of the Waley
brothers, Moko and Gus, whom he had bought and who would sell out at any
better offer. And of course, Al Coe.

Al Coe, the big, glittering, braided, pearl-inlaid two-gun-toter, was
the only man there who had “failed” the Green Spring test. Conlin had
known he would, and he himself had handled the Winchester. His single
shot had clipped a boulder right by Coe’s head, just the way a Kaintuck
rifleman barks a squirrel. He did it, he told Loretta, because he needed
the man. He needed his noise and his color and the bragging, wheeling,
roaring false front of him when they took a bank or robbed train
passengers. The sight of him would strike terror into many a man who
might take an even chance against anyone as small and ordinary-looking
as Conlin, or such saddle tramps as the Waley brothers. And as Al Coe
was only a kind of front, for scaring people who were afraid of
rattlesnakes, Big Ike Friend was another kind, for scaring people who
are afraid of grizzly bears.

All this information came out in patches and drabs and small spurts of
reminiscence. Scott never went after it openly, but he never forgot a
word of it.

“Arch,” Loretta murmured one afternoon as they leaned together over a
book freckled with her pencil marks, “you got to watch out. Al Coe’s
been to Jim about you.”

“About you and me?”

“Yes, that’s really why, but he wouldn’t dare say so—Jim would kill him.
Instead he’s trying to make Jim suspicious of you. He says you’re a
railroad detective. He says he saw you seven years ago in New Mexico.”

“Yellow,” said Scott. “He ever make a play for you?”

“I told you. Only that once, at the spring.”

“And he got his ears pinned back. That’s what I mean, I tangled with him
the day after I got here, and called him. Only that once. He’s had
nothing to say to me ever since. What’d Conlin say when Al told him that
about New Mexico?”

“Told him to go dip his head in the trough. But—you never know what Jim
is thinking.”

“What do you think?”

She stepped back from the table and looked at him. “A man is what he is,
not what he was,” she said.

He grinned, his mouth dry.

Then one day Arch Scott went to town.

He went, of course, with Conlin’s permission and blessing. Conlin was
suspicious of men who didn’t want an occasional ride to town; they built
up pressures which were unpredictable if they should explode at the
hideout, and Conlin liked to predict. Scott went by himself, after
accepting ConIin’s suggestion of company—Big Ike Friend; Conlin did not
want Big Ike to go, but he did want to see how Scott would take the
suggestion, and he was satisfied.

Afterward, Conlin got a full report on what Scott had done at
Elwood—from Henry Little Hawk, of course. No, Scott had not seen Henry.
The little man had squatted under a blanket outside the rear door of the
saloon while Scott drank; he had been in a tree outside Flo Connery’s
heavily curtained window during Scott’s stop at Miz Flagler’s honkytonk.
He had been sitting in the shadow of a packing case across the street
when Scott went into the general store and when Scott came out with the
schoolmaster; he had come up the alley by the school just in time to see
Scott accept a book from the schoolmaster and leave with it.

Scott had cooked and camped once on the way to Elwood, once on the way
back. He had seen and spoken with nobody, either time. Yes, Henry had
had a word with Flo Connery and with the bartender at the Last Chance
Saloon. Scott had been most discreet and had given no information.

Conlin received all this with satisfaction; he picked his men the way he
picked his jobs, with care and forethought. He overlooked only one
thing, and that simply because not even Henry Little Hawk could be
everywhere. He had no inkling that two hours after Scott’s departure the
schoolmaster went to the sheriff’s office with Scott’s carefully drafted
map of Casson’s Quarry, a neighboring mine and cattle town, complete
with the date and time and method of Conlin’s next raid.

Before sundown a deputy was on the stage road to Casson’s Quarry, where,
after some quiet discussion, a welcome was secretly and efficiently
prepared. They had more than a week to sew up the details, there at
Casson’s Quarry, and by the appointed day there were deputies and three
sheriffs and railroad men and bank men and even a United States Marshal.
Conlin was, indeed, in for a surprise, to discover that a small army
knew details possessed, he thought, only by himself and the silent Henry
Little Hawk.

And so, for a week after his return, life at the hideout proceeded in
its quiet and uneventful way. Scott continued with his bookish visits to
Loretta, who was pathetically grateful for the dictionary he brought
back with him, and increasingly taken with the worlds she read
about—worlds of fashion, adventure, romance, scandal in high places.

She didn’t have a chance to say goodbye to Scott. Without advance
warning the whole gang, except for Henry Little Hawk who had gone on
ahead, assembled two hours before sundown, saddled up, and rode. By the
time they camped, most of them had a pretty shrewd idea as to where they
were going; but nobody said anything about it until sunup, when they
squatted around the fire with their black coffee and fatback and
listened to Conlin.

“This here Casson’s Quarry,” Conlin said, squatting in front of a
clean-swept place in the dust, “is hung on the side of a hill. Most of
you been there so you know what it’s like.

“I want you two who ain’t seen it yet to listen even harder; there ain’t
nothin’ clumsier than a man who thinks he knows everything.”

He began to draw in the dust.

“This here’s the main drag, they call the Stage Road. The town mostly
tapers off gradual to the north and west, but here on the east there’s a
hogback that cuts it off real sharp. The Stage Road runs right down to
that hogback, and the bank’s spang on the last corner.”

“Now, time was when the stage had to turn north a mile, on a road that
angled up the hogback, and then switch back south to get down the other
side, windin’ up not forty yards away from the butt end of the main
drag. Somebody got the idea of cuttin’ through the hogback so the stage
could drive straight through, so they done that, and it’s their pride
and joy; they opened it with speeches and all that, and everybody in
town was drunk for two days.

“But if you go in town that way—and we do—you get through that cut and
practic’ly fall into the bank. We don’t scatter and we don’t filter in,
not this time; we go in together, fast and bunched up, and no yippin’
an’ ki-yi-in’, either, hear me, Al? We take the bank and bounce back out
again before anyone can so much as start for the sheriff’s office—it’s
way the hell up the other end of the street.

“Coe, Ike, Scott—you three go in with me. Moko, you and your brother
ride right past the front and down the alley at the other side and flush
out anybody you see there. Go right around the back and around the bank
to the front again and cover us—we ought to be out by then.

“Then we bunch up again and out we go through the cut. You all got it
straight in your minds how to get back? Six of us—we go back six
different ways. Just one thing—if you see Henry Little Hawk settin’ on
the hitchin’ rail at the bank, go on by and don’t even look at the
place. We’ll all go to the Piebald Bar and have a drink and go on home.
Is there any questions?”

There were no questions. Conlin stood up and shuffled out the sketch he
had made in the dust, and they mounted. They rode west for two miles and
then left the trail and entered the woods. It was scramble and duck for
a while, and once they had to lead their horses; but at last they
emerged on the Stage Road, not a quarter of a mile from the cut.

From the middle of the road they could look through the hogback that
barred the way like a high earthen wall, and straight up the main street
of Casson’s Quarry. It was all but deserted.

“Hey, Jim—bank open now, you reckon?”

“Sure, Ike. Cattle auction today, and payday at the mines.”

“Don’t see many people around.”

“Let me do the worrying,” said the Badlands Bookkeeper. “Let’s get it
done, boys.”

They cantered down the road. They had it all to themselves.

Al Coe moved up beside Scott. “All the same to you, perfessor,” he
growled, “I’ll stick by you.”

Scott flicked a glance at him. It was the first time since that talk in
the bunkhouse that Coe had said more to him than “Pass the salt.”

“Help yourself, Coe,” drawled Scott, “I ain’t afraid to ride next to a
target like that pretty hat.”

“I don’t figure they’ll shoot no New Mexico lawman,” said Coe.

“You and me,” said Scott steadily, “we’re going to settle this thing
out, right quick.”

“That’s what I figure,” said Coe, and he rode close.

“God,” said one of the Waley brothers as they approached the cut, “a
ghost town.”

“Just early, that’s all,” said Ike.

“Let’s go,” said Conlin, and flicked his mount into a lope. They
bunched, Al Coe shouldering Scott annoyingly. Scott glared at him, but
then they were into the cut and too busy keeping out from under each
other to argue.

And suddenly their way was blocked.

A small, tattered figure on a moldy gray mare suddenly appeared at the
town end of the cut and ambled toward them. The little brown man seemed
to be asleep on his mount.

“Chop ’im down,” barked Big Ike to Conlin, who was in the lead.

“Chop hell, that’s Henry!” Conlin tried to rein in, but for three, four
seconds the idea didn’t penetrate to the others and they crowded him at
a dead run. “Whoa, dammit!” roared Conlin in the loudest voice Scott had
ever heard from him.

They bumped and milled and cussed, and then all hell broke loose.

From the town end of the cut a dozen men appeared. From above, on each
side, guns like thunder and lead like hail roared down. There must have
been fifty men up there on the ridge, flat on their bellies, watching
them come, and now half of them were pouring lead down into the ambush
and half were diving and frog-hopping down the eastern slope, to close
the trap at the other end.

“Back, get back!” shouted Conlin; but the last word was not a shout. It
was an agonized grunt as a .44 slug tore through his thigh and into the
side of his horse’s neck. The horse screamed and reared, and Conlin
fought back, twisting the animal around by brute strength, so that it
was headed back through the cut as its forefeet touched tire road.

Moko Waley and his mount were down, kicking and spitting their lives
out; Conlin jumped them. His horse screamed again as he lunged forward.

There was a confused motion in front of him—Big Ike leading him pace for
pace for an interminable moment; Big Ike, the only one of his crew who’d
stick by him, stick for sure, no matter what—then Big Ike throwing his
guns up in the air, riding with his hands up and empty, and terror on
his face as he swung his head from side to side, hoping someone in the
posse would see him surrendering.

To one side was Gus Waley, afoot, hands up too. On the other side was Al
Coe, maybe in a panic, crowding Arch Scott to a standstill against the
rock wall.

Then there was nothing ahead of Conlin but a line of men across the
road, between him and the badlands, and suddenly he was afloat in the
air, his horse gone out from under; and then a jarring, red-hazed impact
as he fell, and the wound in his thigh scalding with road grit. He got
one foot up, the other knee under him, and wavered there; then there was
a thunder of hoofs behind him and Henry Little Hawk landed lightly in
the dust. The little breed caught Conlin under the armpits and heaved.
It was a desperate, impossible effort; Conlin threw out an arm for
balance and felt his hand on a saddle horn.

Then somehow he was lying face down on the back of the breed’s gray
mare, rushing the line of deputies, riding two of them down.

When Conlin glanced back, he saw Henry Little Hawk lying in the road,
one leg twisted crazily. He was propped up on his elbow, waving goodbye
like an old woman watching a train pull out of a depot.

There were horsemen at the town end of the cut, but none here; and the
cut was full of crazy horses, dead horses, dead and crazy men; so Conlin
got clean away on the breed’s horse.

Back in the cut Arch Scott was crowded to the wall by Coe and his big
black stallion. A man afoot, with a big shiny star pinned to his vest,
shouted, “This way, Mr. Scott, this way, I’ll cover you.”

A hurt-animal sound woke her, and she lay dazedly for a moment, thinking
it was part of some unhappy dream. But then she heard it again and flew
out of bed and down the narrow stairs.

Out front, on the grass near the door, Jim Conlin lay face down making
the noise. A few feet away stood Henry’s gray mare, blown and foundered,
the reins over her head and a rope of spittle carrying clear from her
bloody mouth to the ground.

Loretta got the Bookkeeper inside somehow, and somehow got his clothes
off and washed away that special mud made of dust, blood, and sweat,
until she could find out where he was hurt. Actually it wasn’t much of a
wound, as such things go—a little hole here and a large one nearby where
the slug had gone through. It had missed the thighbone and had almost
stopped bleeding. But it hurt, and maybe it wouldn’t heal. She did what
she could. She did pretty well.

He didn’t talk for a long time. When he did, he said, “All gone. All,
all gone. He saved me, Loretta, and he died.”

“Big Ike?”

“Big Ike!” he snorted. “Tucked his tail down and threw away his guns.”

“Al Coe?”

“Dead. They shot him dead, then they shot him some more.

She had to know, but … don’t ask, don’t ask; maybe—“The Waleys?”

“Moko dead. Gus, he and Big Ike quit.” Conlin half rose, screwing up his
face. “Big Ike surrendered, you know that”” he shouted.

“Shh. Shh. Did … was it Arch Scott who saved you?” “Damn it, I told
you.” He sank back. “I always said ‘the breed.’ Never slept in the
bunkhouse with the others. He never asked to, but I tell you, I’d have
laughed if he ever did, kicked his butt, the breed. Never ate with us
white men, except campin’. He was the one, the only damn one—he saved
me, and he died.”

“Henry,” she identified finally.

“All eyes, all brains. Tried to warn us, then he saved me, then he
died.”

She hit herself softly on the temples. “Jimmy, for the love of God—”

“All gone. That Coe, crazy as hell. Never tried to fight, never tried to
run. Hung on to Scott, watching him every second, then shot him in the
head. Then they cut Coe to pieces—crazy …”

“Scott—dead?”

“All gone,” said the Bookkeeper. “All gone.”

After a time he said, “Loretta?”

“Get some sleep,” she said hoarsely. “You got to get some sleep.”

He nodded weakly. “Yuh. Some … Loretta, they’ll be comin’. Big Ike, if
he’d quit, he’d bring ’em. And Gus Waley. Always said he’d sell me out
for a good enough price. They got the price now—his dirty neck for
mine.” He breathed painfully for a while. “We’ll take all the gold we
carry, Loretta. You pack anything you want, and we’ll start again some
place.” He caught up with his breathing again, then opened his eyes and
looked around the lamplit room.

“Loretta?”

But she was not there.

In the morning Jim Conlin woke up. He had a fever. There was a bottle of
water nearby and he drank it all. There was also a note:

_i didn’t take nothing but my dictionary i’m going in the morning if you
can understand that then i’m going back to work don’t try and find me
not ever._

_L_.

“All, all gone,” Conlin muttered. He dragged himself upstairs and got
fresh clothes. He wondered what had happened. Al Coe had said Scott was
a railroad man, but Al was always a trouble-maker. Henry, he’d know what
happened.

He found Henry’s long Winchester. It made a pretty good crutch. He got
to his cache and took as much gold as he could drag. It wasn’t much. He
inched it down to the corral and caught a gelding and got the gold on.
He roped a black, an old one, but the only one that would hold still for
the kind of roping he was doing now. He got a saddle on it, led it to
the bars, and climbed up on them and fell into the saddle. He rode off,
leading the gelding.

They found the gelding, dead, in a ravine a month later. They got that
gold and all that was in the cache too. Jim Conlin, the Badlands
Bookkeeper, was never caught. Maybe the Mexicans got him, maybe fever.
Maybe he’s still alive.



LIKE YOUNG


Here in the moonlit I sit, assigned to write an ode. I won’t write an
ode. I’ll write … I’ll write what happened instead. I’ll never write
another ode. I’m a throwback. I’m a grinning savage, as of this day. And
they won’t believe me, and they’ll laugh—or they will believe me, and
then by the powers I think I’ll laugh. I think I will. I think I can.

Or cry. I think I can.

I know: I’ll write it with all the background, just as if there was
somebody left on earth who hadn’t lived with it up to this moment. I
just want to see if one narrative can contain all of an enormity like
this.

The Immune—that’s what we’re called. But that’s a misnomer. We got it,
all of us. It’s just that we didn’t die of it. So, although Mankind was
dead, we weren’t just yet.

Mankind was dead … Humanity wasn’t. I guess these things are open to
definition. There were, by the time we got them all together, six
hundred and four of us left of all the billions. We were all strong and
healthy, and most of us young. We could live, learn, love. We could not
propagate. So much for Mankind.

We were, all of us, devoted to a single idea, and that was that Humanity
should not perish. Humanity in the sense of aspiration, generosity—if
you like, nobility: that was what we were dedicated to preserve. It was
too late for us to use it. We’d only just realized what it was, when the
new encephalitis appeared. Perhaps we realized it _because_ the
encephalitis appeared. However we came by it, we had it, and we had to
pass it on, or it was all too ludicrous a tragedy.

We decided to give it to the otters.

Like many another simple truth, the fact that the otters would be the
next ones had been obvious and undisclosed. We were bemused by the fact
that other animals—dogs, for example, and the higher apes, and (remember
how exciting that was?) the contemplative porpoise—they all had
intelligences like ours, in kind if not in quality. It was possible to
think like a porpoise, or like a dog. It was a high conceit indeed to
assume that the Next One would have an intelligence like ours. Once we
were ready to discard that cocky notion, it became clear that the otter,
a tool-using animal far earlier in its evolution than we had been, and
possessed of a much more durable sense of humor, was logically our
successor.

We despaired for ourselves; I want to make that quite clear. Our
mourning was deep and bitter. But it must be made quite as clear that we
passed through this mourning and emerged on the other side, as befit our
maturity. We emerged late, and, for ourselves, uselessly; but emerge we
did, mature we had become. You see what we were, for all our individual
youth. We were the Elders of earth, and carried our insigne with a very
real dignity. Too, we were each of us, all of us, wealthy and powerful
beyond the wildest imaginings of anyone, ever—there were so few of us,
so well trained, with such resources (and no need to save). Any of us
could wave a hand and move a mountain. Yet the big thing—the real
thing—was that sense of purpose and of dignity we had brought through
the terror and the death; a greater purpose, and a dignity more real,
than (but for a feeble flicker or two) mankind had ever known before.
Proud we were, of course; but pride is a silly little word to use for
such a thing. Humbly, we liked ourselves. And it was this above all we
were dedicated to keeping alive. The otters would have civilization,
with or without us, probably, but the achievement of this ultimate
_dignity—_that was something we alone could teach them. Only a Man could
reach that height. Death gave us this noble knowledge. Life—the New
One’s life—gave us this purpose. And now they would have it in their own
lifetime.

And what a task it had been! For we were too advanced, and the otters
far too primitive, for us to impress anything upon them while we shared
the earth with them. We would be dust for many thousands of years before
they began to communicate even with one another. We had no intention of
speeding up their pre-history. Let them be what they were, strong,
adaptable, ubiquitous. Let them content themselves with floating on
their backs, holding shellfish on their chests, cracking them open with
a stone, until the day came when of their own accord they found that was
not enough. Let them kindle their own light.

But we were determined that once it was burning it should never flicker
or dim. There would be no dark ages for the otters. We would reduce
basic knowledge to its essence, put these in the most understandable
form, and leave them like milestones (a statement and a promise, each)
along the way.

For the milestones we chose the new alloy 2-chrome-vanadium-prime, which
came to be called bicrovalloy. (Ah, what cities that might have built!)
Properly fabricated, it could be formed into rods, bars, sheets; once
irradiated, it would not, almost could not, change its form or state.
This was no molecular lattice, nor even a net of atoms. It can best be
described as a matrix of nuclei. Then thirty-foot sheets, supported only
at the edges, could bear thousands of pounds at the center without
bending more than a few thousandths. A hundred feet of quarter-inch rod,
held horizontally by one end, showed no detectable sag. Drawn to a
point, it would write on diamond as on wax; plates of it cooled to
within a few thousandths of a degree of absolute zero and—or—raised to
twenty million degrees, showed only a slight improvement of their
finish. And what a finish! Silver-gilt, with a touch of peach …

On plates of bicrovalloy, then, man’s wisdom was scribed. The task was
enormous, but it was the only task we had. We had first to amass the
necessary knowledge, then to distill it (and distill it again, and
again, and again), and finally to codify it in such a way that the new
race, the parameters of whose intelligence we could know only vaguely,
would when ready for it be able to take and use it. When they had
mastered fire, they must have ceramics. When they began working metal,
they must have alloying and heat treatment. At a certain point in this
mastery, they must be given knowledge of the power of steam. And so on.
But nothing, if possible, before they were ready.

Placement of bicrovalloy plates, bearing the pertinent simple
illustrations, in pottery-clay pits was self-evident, concealing them in
likely lodes of minable metals was not so easy, for they must be hidden
far enough down to make sure that their discovery was no accident. We
gave language, numbers. And the ultimate secrets—ethical, spiritual as
well as technological—these must be triply concealed, so that they would
come out as a series of revelations, each a discovery, each a hint of
the next, with everything in our power done to ensure they get it
neither too soon nor, through over-concealment, not at all.

And so it was that the four equations of Einstein’s General Field
Theory, together with Heisenberg’s addenda, were placed in the most
inaccessible vault of all—in the mantle of the earth itself, in the
bottom of the great bore under two miles of ocean where, in the
twentieth century, we had reached our peak as engineers, seekers after
knowledge. I need not go into the details of this ultimate achievement.
For all our dedication, our immense resources, and our newer techniques,
it was far harder for us to reach the bore than it had been for our
forefathers to dig it.

The concealment of this final bicrovalloy plate was (it seemed at the
time) our climactic conquest. I look back on those days with affection
and sadness. It was a time of contemplative pride. We kept busy, of
course, but our work was done. We had, in a fashion, survived our own
death. We existed in a timeless moment, neither afterlife nor
immortality, after the end of one great flowering and before the
beginning of another. Humankind, the very death of humankind—that was
behind us. The otters had not even begun; this was eons before their
birth as the Next Ones. So in this period we walked proudly, humbly
conscious of our true usefulness and nobility. We had carried the torch.

And then—

Then De Wald produced the last equation.

De Wald had worked ceaselessly even before our project had begun, even
before the first recorded case of the new encephalitis had claimed the
first of its billion of victims. His material was the remarkable
mathematical achievements of Heisenberg, and his goal a single
expression which would not only encompass Einstein’s four, but which
would distill even Heisenberg’s into something as clear as e=mc².

We had conferences and excited discussions, of course, but they were
ritual (we had time for ritual then, and a great liking for it);
everyone knew what was to be done. We had known because of the supreme
_rightness_ of such a discovery at such a time. Some talked about poetic
justice and some about God; myself—I am not a scientist—I attributed it
to Art. For our kind to end with a whimper, to be proven futile, or to
have our work left in any way unfinished—this was Bad Art. De Wald’s
discovery, on the other hand, coming at just this time, was Art at its
peak. One might almost say it justified everything, viewed
objectively—even the tragic death of mankind. In a million years,
through the eyes of another species, this would be the greatest story
ever told …

Joyfully we set about the sizable task of recovering the now outdated
set of bicrovalloy plates from the very flesh of the earth’s body. And
meanwhile the new plate was prepared—the old one could not be changed or
added to, of course. Oh, it was good, good to be back at work again!

Then we were ready for the final placement. This of all times was the
time to have a ceremony, and we planned a beautiful one. Grogerio
himself would compose special music, and naturally no one but Fluger
would design the dais on which the recovered plate and the ultimate one
would lie side by side during the ceremony. And I was not in the least
surprised when they came to me for an ode. Not in the least reluctant,
either: for if created art comes from inspiration, surely there was
enough and to spare in such an assignment.

I requested that I be left alone at the beautiful seaside spot on the
night before the ceremony. I had already done a draft of the ode, but I
knew what that vigil would do for the final version.

And indeed, the whole mood of the place and the time was perfect for
such an effort. The last of the people left late in the afternoon, and I
made myself comfortable in a spot where I could, at a glance, take in
sea and sky, the silver beach and Fluger’s beautiful dais, raised on two
of his dizzying, gravity-defying arches. The _rightness_ I mentioned
earlier—this was a case in point. It has been said many times that
neither a Fluger arch nor bicrovalloy could exist without the other.

And the sun went down in a blaze: how right! Even as we …

And in the east, a leaching of the firmament, and the loom of the
moon … to be a new light on earth …

Then, wonder of wonders, there was a splash in the whispering surf and a
small blackness oozing through the illumined dark. Oh, I thought,
awe-struck: it can’t be, but … yes; nothing could be more right … and
then the moon struck upward with its metal edge, and cracked the cup of
darkness, and I could see I was right in this rightness—it was a large
male sea-otter snaking through the sand, working up toward the dais.

Exactly facing me, and not thirty yards way, he froze; had I not known
where he was, I might have taken him for a hummock of sand or its
deepening shadow. But I did know where he was, and in the growing light
I could see the sensitive twitch of his comic mustache. I was not
deceived as to the subject of his gaze, either, for I know his kind. An
otter never looks directly at anything, any more than a bird does. One
eye was regarding his beloved sea, and the other the dais. I, directly
ahead of him, was unsuspected. And how perfect a picture this made, in
all its symbolisms … how very right!

He turned in his quick lithe way and scuttled toward the dais,
occasionally stopping in the otter’s brief sudden pauses, as if one of
his motivating wires were loose at the battery.

Silently, bemused and bemagicked, I followed. For in a moment like this,
it must be so; it must be so: I alone—I, possibly the most perfectly
qualified person on Earth and in all history to appreciate such a
priceless picture, I would see this minion of the far-distant New Ones
in the very shrine of all that was highest of Humanity.

And of course I was right—I was right—what could go wrong with such an
enchantment? All the Powers of all the Souls of all Good Art would not
permit anything, in such a moment, but what was right.

The otter, when at last I had crept round the dais and up behind the
curtains and could see him, crouched motionless before and between the
two bicrovalloy plates, the one just recovered, bearing Einstein’s and
Heisenberg’s revelations, and the other which had just been fabricated
to replace it.

I thought (a very whisper of a thought, lest I think too loudly and
ripple this tableau): Are you praying, little one?

The otter rose suddenly on his hind legs and put his forepaws on the
reclaimed plate. He seemed, in his clumsy, fumbling little way, to be
caressing its surface. And the strangest feeling came over me, of shame,
of that special kind of guilt one feels on having committed a faux pas,
a _gaffe_, an in-itself petty kind of social offense which nonetheless
it is acutely painful to remember. I felt like an intruder, a spy of the
most ignorant and clumsy sort. To spare myself any more to brood on in
the future, I removed the one wrong thing in that symphony of
rightness—myself. Noiselessly I sank down behind the curtain and slipped
into the sand below, and I was congratulating myself on being perhaps
alone among men to have such perfect sensibility.

Rather than disturb him at whatever accidental orisons he was performing
up there above me, I sat quietly until at last I saw him scampering off
toward the sea. He had snatched up some bit of trash or jetsam from
somewhere, and I saw him digging at the water’s edge with it. I could
just make out the two plump clams he unearthed, and then he was gone
into the surf. I rose to catch, perhaps just once more, a single last
glimpse of this creature, fellow to my most magic moment, and (as was
only right) I did. He was floating joyfully on his back in the
moonlight, with a clam on his strong chest. He struck it deftly with his
crude tool, gulped it from the shattered shell, threw his unwanted trash
upward into the moonlight, and was gone beneath the waves.

I gazed after the graceful clever little rascal, loving him … and turned
toward my vigil-spot, all abrim with inspiration … and had I gone there,
I surely should have written one hell, one hell of a _hell_uva ode … but
instead I strode back up on the dais, to relive that incredible moment.

In the brilliant moonlight I gazed down at the shrine of humanity, all
its dignity and its worth, and at all the meanings of this mighty
gesture of faith in the life that had been and the life that was to be,
when my eyes took in … took in what, some unmeasured time later—it might
have been an hour—my mind was able to take in …

 … just to the right of Einstein’s brief immortal perfect statement of
mass-energy conversion, the comment:

WELL, SOMETIMES

written on, _written into the bicrovalloy plate_.

And there were two corrections in the Heisenberg statement, strikeouts
and carelessly scribbled figures which seemed to have been scribed deep
in the impervious metal by a single small foreclaw …

But it was what had been done to the new De Wald plate that dealt me
that blinding blow, from which I recovered (was it an hour later?) so
slowly. For under that climactic, breathtaking achievement of intuitive
mathematics, that most transcendental of all human statements, the De
Wald Synthesis, the otter had scrawled:

NONSENSE!

I write no more odes. As for you who find this, and the plates which are
its proof, do as you will. Have a suicide wave if you like. Or gather
round in chittering groups and make wild surmise about the true source
of the encephalitis which destroyed us, and great agonized guesses as to
whether the otter was truly not quite aware of my presence and the
significance of these plates and this whole occasion, and as to whether
he and his kind are or are not impatient for our little remnant, with
all our powers and resources, to be broken and maddened and die and go
away. Or send your divers out if you like, to salvage that which he used
to crack a clam—it’s out there, not far—and prove to yourself that it is
indeed the corner he broke off the De Wald plate with his bare paws;
pick it up and fit it back again and pass it around and turn your silly
laboratories loose on it. Maybe some of you will finally begin to roar
with laughter, sob with merriment, as I have done to the point of
exhaustion and helplessness, unable to get out of your minds the
enormity of this one ridiculous fact: How _childish_ is his
handwriting!… so go, do any of these things, or none of them, or
something, out of the vast store of your pride and knowledge, of your
own devising.

But me, I’m a joyful throwback … I’m one with my eager ancestors:—I’m
going hunting.



NIGHT RIDE


Ninety-four miles an hour. In the back of the bus somebody was dead. In
the front of the bus, a scared little guy with thick wrists was going to
be dead.

Ninety-six miles an hour. He had a choice to make, he realized as he
manhandled the twelve-ton monster through a rocky gap and down around a
turn so sharp that loose material from the shoulder sprayed out into
space. He had this choice (at a hundred and two miles per hour): He
could die alone, blindfolded and strapped to a chair, while a prison
chaplain made things easy as he could; or he could just forget to turn
the wheel at the next curve, or the one after, and die that way.

Along with thirty-two other guys. Thirty-two innocent guys and a
murderer. That, thought little Paul Cahill, half out of his seat to whip
the wheel around, that might be worth the price. A good clean finish to
the dirty story of Romeo.

The name really was Romeo … Charley Romeo. Only nobody kidded Romeo
about it. That could be because he was just under six five and stood
about this wide. Or it could he because he was proud of it. He acted the
part, Charley Romeo did, hollering _Watch Me, World_ the whole time. He
played basketball, and girls. When he made a pass, it stayed made. From
any corner—anybody’s corner—he sank his shots whenever he felt like it.
And if he had to stand taller to do it he’d just as soon stand on
somebody’s face.

Even Paul Cahill would admit that Charley Romeo was a great basketball
player. There was only one thing in all the world that meant more to
Paul Cahill than basketball—especially Hill City basketball. He drove
the bus at the little mountain school, but he never missed a home game
either. The one thing in all his world was Jenny Cahill, his brand new,
late-model wife. Some model. They still make that kind, but not often.
Jenny Cahill worked in the school office.

Ever since Charley Romeo came to Hill City, his idea of top comedy was
to ride the little bus driver. But when Charley Romeo got a look at
Jenny Cahill, and when his first easy hook-shot her way not only missed
the hoop but the backboard as well, why, the wisecracks got a little
rougher than funny. Romeo never let up on Paul Cahill, nor Jenny either.

Paul Cahill was a little guy; but he was a gutsy little guy, and he
wouldn’t have held still for much of this if it had not been for “Turk”
McGurk, the coach; for the school; for basketball itself. Paul felt deep
loyalties to all these, and there was no arguing the fact that in his
big fast hands Charley Romeo held the Conference win and the
Invitation—things that the little school wanted and needed, things that
Paul Cahill wanted for the school almost as much as Coach McGurk. And as
for Coach McGurk, if he ever felt anything or thought anything but
basketball, he fought it down till it didn’t show. That meant that if,
to win, Charley Romeo had to pull the wings off flies, Coach McGurk
would go catch flies for him.

All this had been going on for too long a time the afternoon the bus
started out for Johnson Mesa and the most important game of the year.
Win this one, and the Invitation would be a cinch.

Everyone felt good at first, excited and happy. The big new bus was
full—all the second-string players were along to see what they could
learn, and a couple of guys to report for the school paper, and that
weird-o they called Big Dome Craig. (Wherever you found Charley Romeo,
you also found Big Dome—nobody knew why. Except it was Romeo’s idea.
Maybe he thought some of Big Dome’s brains would rub off on him.) And of
course, Turk McGurk the coach. It was a fine day, and there was some
grand country to climb. But really climb—the road wound up and up for
eleven and a half miles to a mountain pass nearly seven thousand feet
above sea level.

Paul Cahill kept the giant diesel humming along in third and fourth
gears in the low range. At first even Paul felt good, in spite of the
trouble he knew would come from the big center and his big mouth. He
knew it would come, because it always did on these long hauls. Charley
Romeo could look at just so much scenery, and then he’d get bored, and
that was when he’d stir up what he called a little fun.

And sure enough, when they were within four miles of the pass, Paul
Cahill saw, in the big inside mirror, Romeo suddenly loom up out of his
seat. He sat side-saddle on the arm of the seat, about halfway down the
aisle, and all the faces from there on back swung toward him.

“Once upon a time—” he bellowed; and all the faces ahead of him swung
around to look back.

“Siddown, Romeo,” Paul called out peaceably. “You’re blocking my view.”

“Little man,” said Romeo, “drive your bus. _I_ am goin’ to tell a story.
A real old bed-time story.”

From the corner of his eye Paul Cahill saw the coach, McGurk, sight down
the aisle, look back up at the mirror, and then subside with that
give-him-his-head expression. Romeo went on with his yarn, about how
“this guy I know”—he meant himself—drew a bead on “a certain chick”—for
a bad moment Paul thought he meant … never mind: he wouldn’t even think
it … anyway, the story went on and on. The usual proportion of boneheads
who always seem ready to encourage a fool egged Romeo on.

Paul Cahill lost track of the story for a while; he had a job to do. The
road was none too wide. Sometimes there were wide flat shoulders, then
in a few yards they’d be in a cut with jagged rock walls just far enough
apart for two squashed lanes of traffic; then again there would be that
queasy feeling that if you hung your chin on the right front fender you
could look a blue mile straight down.

But at last he reached that long straight slope that approaches the
pass, and happened to glance in the mirror. Romeo was still at it, but
what jolted Paul Cahill’s attention was the face of young Curtis, white,
strained, twisted up on itself with a mixture of held-in anger and
disgust; he looked as if he might burst into tears, or throw up, or
maybe both. Paul Cahill, driving intently, let himself listen again:

“… but I mean, she had a bedbug on her, but it was pink. Yeah, a pink
bedbug, right here.” Romeo demonstrated, and the boneheads roared. The
reporter, Curtis, bent way down as if he had a shoe to fix or wanted to
hide his face.

Suddenly Paul Cahill understood. He’d seen Romeo giving the quick casual
rush to Curtis’ girlfriend Beth, a squeak-sized upcountry kid who’d be
no more able to handle the likes of Romeo than a rock slide. So she
happened to have a pink mole some place. And now if Curtis made one move
to shut him up, the whole bus would suddenly know just who Romeo was
talking about; the whole school would know about her “pink bedbug,” yes,
and about her and Romeo to boot. Paul Cahill could see Charley Romeo’s
quick glances down at Curtis. The big fellow was enjoying himself.

Paul Cahill suddenly bellowed, “Now dammit, Romeo, I said get in your
seat. I can’t see out the back.”

Romeo looked around him in stage amazement.

“Any of you fellers hear something?” he said. He made no move to get off
his perch. He looked forward, into the big mirror, and that way right
into Paul’s face. “You mean to say you don’t know what goes on behind
your back, little man?”

Paul Cahill knotted his jaw and drove his bus. He flicked a glance off
the road and saw Romeo’s face happy, tense, the flick of his tongue as
he wet his lips. He saw McGurk, the coach, looking troubled.

Romeo said, “Tell me something, Shorty, you haul the baseball teams too,
don’t you?”

Paul Cahill, seeing the coach’s face, forcing himself to think of the
big game, of the tricky road, did not answer.

“You know what I’m goin’ to do,” chuckled Romeo, “I’m goin’ to stay off
the ball team next term. Long as you don’t know what goes on behind you,
why, every time we have an ‘away’ game, I’ll just stick right around
home and—”

Tires crunched heavily, air shrilled as Paul Cahill tramped on the
brake, pulled over to the side, set the emergency. All the passengers,
but one, sat in surprised silence in the sudden hush: Coach McGurk,
however, was on his feet, leaning close over Paul Cahill’s shoulder—so
close, the little driver could not rise.

McGurk said, pretending to point at the dashboard, “Getting hot?”

Paul Cahill nodded curtly. “A little.”

“Listen, boy,” said Coach McGurk. “We don’t want that.”

“Okay, okay,” Paul Cahill muttered, and he really meant to stay in line;
but then Romeo spoke up, just as Paul Cahill was about to start the bus
again.

“Now don’t that make y’all go pitty-pat!” Romeo drawled. “Just a mention
of her, and he gets all warm.”

Paul Cahill was out of his seat and down the aisle before the coach knew
he was gone. He stalked up to Charley Romeo, sitting on the arm of his
seat in the center of the bus, and looked him in the eye.

“Who’s this ‘her’ you’re talking about?” Paul Cahill demanded.

“Your wife I’m talking about. Jenny, I’m talking about. Why?”

Paul Cahill started his swing with the first spoken syllable of his
wife’s name. Romeo caught his wrist with one easy motion and pulled it
past him, fast, snatching Cahill right off his feet. He fell heavily,
face down in the aisle, and Romeo slid off the arm of the seat and sat
down on him.

“I tell you what I’m goin’ to do,” Romeo said. “Tonight I’m gonna run up
some points, and just so you’ll enjoy your favorite game even more, for
every one I sink I’m goin’ to holler _Hey Jenny!_ and since I plan to
sink about thirty, that’ll give you lots of chances to do something
about it.”

“Get off him,” said Coach McGurk.

“Oh by all means,” said Romeo, getting up, laughing. “Time to get up,
little man. Get this show on the road.”

Wheezing, white with fury, Paul Cahill managed to get back on his feet.
Coach McGurk put a hand on his arm but he shook it off.

“Romeo,” Paul Cahill said clearly, “I’m going to kill you.”

It was a lousy couple of minutes, and even then, some of the boneheads
managed to laugh. Paul Cahill, hurt, angry, and humiliated, let in his
clutch, kicked off the emergency, and started uphill again. He drove
with especial care all the rest of the way. One of the first-string
forwards gaped at the new sign as they rolled into the Mesa.

“_Science_ building? What they done with the casaba pavilion?” he asked.

“There’s enough hardwood left to choke a hoop,” Coach McGurk told him.
“Schools all over are making new science buildings out of gyms. Here,
they turned the whole north wing over to the science department. But
there’s still a court.”

“Education got a way of creeping up on you in this business,” said
Romeo. He liked it. He said it three more times.

Paul Cahill shouldered the big bus through the crowded parking lot, and
pulled up by the side entrance. The boys bounded out, heading for the
dressing rooms, or for the best seats. Paul Cahill stayed a while,
gunned his motor once, watching his gauges. He let her idle, switched on
the body lights, walked through the bus, sniffed for monoxide around the
back, picked up some scraps of paper. In the luggage rack, here and
there, were lunch boxes, coffee flasks. He knew them all, who they
belonged to; he knew all these guys, what they wanted out of life. He
stood a moment, confused by his vague rush of thoughts.

One of the lunches, battered, bright blue, with brass corners, caught
his eye. He frowned, picked it up. It was Romeo’s. He knew, just as
everyone else knew, that the coffee in it was heavily laced with vodka,
which doesn’t smell on the breath. Coach McGurk alone didn’t know it,
probably because he didn’t want to. Romeo trained carefully, but on the
way back from one of those forty-pointers of his, he just had to
celebrate.

Paul Cahill sighed, put the box back, and yanking the keys on the way,
hopped out of the bus, closed and locked the doors. Somebody was waiting
for him out there. Coach McGurk.

“Don’t go in there, Paul.”

“Don’t what?”

Coach McGurk looked, sounded, very tired. “Stay out of the hall,” he
said wearily. “You know that damn fool Romeo will do what he said. Why
get yourself all worked up?”

“Oh,” said Paul Cahill, remembering. Romeo was going to yell _Hey
Jenny!_ every time he hit the bucket. He said coldly, “And you wouldn’t
want me maybe to mess up your ball game.”

“It isn’t that, Paul—”

“It is that. And … for that I got to miss the best game of the year.”

“You said it yourself. It’s the best game of the year. It’s important to
all of us. Stay away from it, Paul.”

Paul Cahill stood by the bus and watched the coach shamble inside. Then
he opened up the bus, flipped up his seat; and fumbled through the
tools. After a while he got out again and entered the building. Once
inside, he remembered he had not locked up this time. He shrugged and
sidled into the noisy gym. No matter what the coach said, this was a
game he did not intend to miss.

At the tapoff, Romeo coiled down like a huge steel spring and then
didn’t jump. The opposing center, caught by surprise, barely tipped the
ball. Romeo’s long arms snapped up like the business end of a rat trap;
he double-palmed the ball and snapped his wrists. The ball took off like
a flying saucer, seemingly self-propelled, and flew by itself to the
Johnson hoop, where it swished through without touching iron at all.
First blood in the first second of play, and Romeo hadn’t even moved his
feet.

_“Hey Jenny!”_ he roared. Blind rage came and went in Paul Cahill. The
second time it happened he clenched his fists and turned to go. Then it
happened a third time, the roar _Hey Jenny!_ and this time Paul Cahill
roared with it, a sound without words in it. He rushed forward, a
ten-inch box wrench flailing the air. Then something like a railway
mail-hook caught his left arm and spun him around, and the wrench
disappeared out of his right hand, and he was being hustled in the
opposite direction, Coach McGurk on one side of him, young Curtis on the
other.

A door opened for them; Big Dome Craig opened it, from inside.

“Sorry, son, but you got to stay in there,” said the coach, and they
shoved him into a room and the door closed. Through the frosted glass,
Paul Cahill could see one of them take up what looked like sentry duty.
It had all happened so fast he had stopped thinking.

_Hey Jenny!_ He heard Romeo clearly, and a huge noise from the crowd. He
scurried all around the room. There was another door, locked. The
windows were hinged vents, high up in a glass ceiling. It had once been
part of the gym, he recalled. He saw—now that he looked—that it was a
chem lab.

He stood by the glass door after that, listening to the biggest game of
the year. _Hey, Jenny!_ He thought he would go out of his head. Maybe he
did, a little. He heard his wife’s name again. He heard the crowd pick
it up. He heard that almost thirty times. It was Charley Romeo’s big
night.

After some hours—months—of this, the door opened and Coach McGurk came
in. He spent a moment looking carefully at Paul Cahill’s face:

“We won it,” he said at last.

Paul Cahill didn’t say anything. After a long silence he moved his head
tiredly and said, “Let’s go.”

On the way back, the team was boisterous. Well, they’d won it; that was
what they’d come for. Everybody kept patting Romeo on the back. As soon
as they were on the road and the lights out, Paul Cahill dimly saw, in
his mirror, Romeo’s long arm snake up and get his lunch box.

Paul Cahill settled down to his work, and let everything else trickle
into a place inside him that had a one-way cork on it.

Therefore he heard the noise a little later than anyone else. It had to
filter through to him—a steamboat-whistle kind of _Hoo! Hoo!_

Romeo, of course. Paul Cahill ground his teeth. Then the _Hoo Hoo!_
noise turned into a gibbering burble, and a sort of scream so alarming
that the boys began to make worried noises. Someone yelled for light and
the coach went back. Immediately he called out:

“Stop when you can, Paul.” Coach McGurk said it in such a strange tense
tone that all Paul Cahill’s anger evaporated.

Paul Cahill had to drive nearly half a mile before he could stop, for
they were in the pass; still climbing, and they had to get through to
the wider road on the other side. But at last he could pull over and
stop. He turned on the inside dome lights, and saw his passengers
pressing forward from behind, drawing back from around the long figure
of Romeo, stretched out in the aisle.

Without the motor, the silence was like a crash.

Then Coach McGurk said, in a weary, puzzled voice:

“Romeo is dead.”

“Dead?” they asked each other. “Dead,” they kept answering; the word
flicked and frothed over them like whitecaps; while they moved under it
like waves, craning to look, pressing away.

Somebody said something about getting the police. The remark just lay
there.

“Well, what happened to him?” Paul Cahill suddenly barked.

Coach McGurk extended something—a flask—toward him. Paul Cahill started
to take it but the coach used it to push his hand away and put it up to
his face instead.

Paul Cahill smelled it: sweet bitter coffee smell, and the odor of
something else, like … coffee cake? Sugar buns, the kind with …

“Almonds,” Paul Cahill said.

“Almonds hell, that’s arsenic,” Coach McGurk said positively.

Paul Cahill made as if to take the flask to sniff, unbelievingly again,
but the coach moved it out of his reach, picked up the cover from
Romeo’s seat, and screwed it down tight. And all the while the Coach
kept looking and looking at Paul Cahill out of his tired eyes.

Abruptly Paul Cahill realized what was going through Coach McGurk’s
mind. He looked at all the other faces and saw the same idea percolate
through the crowd.

_Who had threatened to kill Romeo?_

_Who had, with the box-wrench, actually tried?_

_Who had the best chance, alone in the bus, to put the fatal dose of
poison into Romeo’s flask?_

Paul Cahill said “I—” and again; “I—” and then could only shake his
head; and if there were any faces left in the crowd that the idea hadn’t
reached by then, they got it.

“We can’t just sit here … put Romeo on the long seat at the back,” said
Coach McGurk.

Nobody wanted to. Finally Paul Cahill and Coach McGurk had to do it.
Romeo’s eyes were open and he was kind of snarling, all his front teeth
bared. No matter what, Paul Cahill was never going to forget that.

Paul Cahill went back to the driver’s seat and switched out the domes.
Everyone settled down. He started the motor and released the brake. The
bus nosed downhill, began to roll immediately. In thirty seconds it was
going fifty. In another ten, Coach McGurk sat bolt upright and shouted
at him:

“Hey! Take it easy. _Hey!_”

Paul Cahill did not answer. He was too busy picking out the details of
the curve ahead, and its one high wall of cliff. Coach McGurk got up and
was thrown right down again as Cahill wheeled around the turn.

“Paul! Paul!” the coach shouted.

Hand over hand in the lurching bus, Coach McGurk got up behind Paul
Cahill and clutched at his arm. Paul Cahill removed one hand to throw
him off, and the back of the bus slewed and nipped the rock wall on the
left. At the crash and tearing sound of aluminum skin, one of the boys
screamed.

The speedometer needle hit ninety-four. One dead, more dead coming. He
could be dead strapped in a chair, with a prison chaplain snaking it as
easy as he could. Or he could be dead much quicker than that, just by
not taking the next turn, or the one after.

Evidence or not, no matter what anyone had heard him say or seen him do,
there was one thing Paul Cahill knew for sure:

_He hadn’t killed Charley Romeo_.

Which meant that someone else had. Someone right here in this bus.

He bellowed, then, at the top of his voice:

“_Listen_. I don’t touch the brake until I know who killed Romeo.”

“You’re crazy!” yelled the coach. “Stop this bus, Paul!”

Paul Cahill yelled back. “Look out!”

Twelve tons of bus entered a turn, sliding, sliding, crossing the
pavement to the far side. At the last possible split second the wheels
seemed to be taking hold, but there was nothing, nothing at all under
the left front—just black dark and distant downward lights. And as the
bus plunged over the edge, the road shook itself and moved under the
wheels again, and they went howling down the road again.

“One more like that and we’ve had it!” Paul Cahill bellowed. “Well?”

The speedometer needle lurched upward.

One hundred and twelve … fourteen.

“Stop! Stop!” yelled Coach McGurk.

_“Shaddup!”_ Paul Cahill roared at him. “Look!”

Somebody back there began shrieking over and over. The turn beginning to
take shape before their headlights was impossible. The shrieking went on
and on—more boys started to yell.

Coach McGurk yelled, “For God’s sake, Paul. This is murder!”

Paul Cahill didn’t answer. He couldn’t take his attention for an instant
from the approaching turn—a narrow cut, a sharp left with a wall on one
side and a precipice on the other, then a right bend to a second cut.

“We’ll all die!” wailed a voice that Paul Cahill dimly recognized as
belonging to Big Dome Craig.

Then they were into the turn, and were never coming out of it. Coach
McGurk got the idea that saved them, temporarily. He put cupped hands
around his mouth and shouted:

“Right side, everybody! Get over to the right side! _Jump!_”

As the bus shuddered into the turn, yawing away toward the sharp drop to
eternity, thirty-two healthy youngsters—somewhere close to two tons of
flesh—flung hard to the right side of the bus.

That did it. The two tons turned the trick, by the narrowest of margins.
A giant tire spun on emptiness for a second, but the other tires held
the road.

Paul Cahill fought the wheel like a bucking bronc.

Behind him someone started to scream.

“Stop him, somebody! Stop him!”

That was Big Dome Craig again. He was cracking. But nobody made a move
to interfere with Paul Cahill at the wheel. They all knew that would
speed the moment of annihilation.

Paul Cahill heard, somewhere at his back, a shrieking, sobbing breath, a
scuffle. Big Dome Craig had tried to get at him, but the others were
holding him back.

Then Big Dome Craig was yelling, “I did it! I DID IT!”

Coach McGurk stumbled up behind Paul Cahill.

“It’s Craig, Paul. He says he killed Romeo. For God’s sake, hit the
brakes! Paul!”

That’s when Paul Cahill told him. Even as he swung the wheel as far as
it would go and held on, he gritted:

“Brakes gone, coach. Air … out. Can’t … even shift gears … air powered.”

Coach McGurk wasted no time on a reply. He barked to the others:

“Left, now. Left. _Jump!_”

The two tons dove across to the other seats. That helped—but not enough.
In the split second before he swung the wheel, Paul Cahill shifted his
grip. There was the tortured rending of aluminum sheathing as the bus
slid along the rock wall—enough to slow it. Then the tires kicked gravel
out and down into the empty night, and again found the road.

They shot through the cut and, blessedly, ahead of them the road turned
up for a half mile before entering the last plunge to the valley. Paul
Cahill rode the uphill stretch with the right hand wheels at the very
edge of the ditch and, as the bus started to lean, Coach McGurk and the
boys shifted again and she settled and ran, and slowed, and not fifty
yards from the top of the rise, she stopped.

“Paul,” said Coach McGurk. That single word was the finest compliment
the little man had ever heard.

Some of the boys began crying, with released tension, crying like the
youngsters they were.

Big Dome Craig was crying too, his hands over his face, crying and
talking at the same time as the truth poured out of him.

Paul Cahill stood by Coach McGurk and listened. Once, during a break in
the confessional, the coach muttered to Paul Cahill:

“I couldn’t believe you were doing it on purpose, Paul. Not even when it
was happening.”

“Thanks,” Paul Cahill said.

“Just a coincidence, the brakes going when they did. But I guess I made
the most of it.” He grinned.

Big Dome Craig was telling now about Romeo and his sister—a long story
and a sad one—and how after she had been in that trouble and gone to the
doctor, she had still wanted to go live with the big fellow, and the
only way Big Dome could stop it was by becoming Romeo’s personal valet,
doing his school work for him, taking his unending abuse. He had thought
of killing Romeo for a long time but he might never have done it, if he
hadn’t found out about the weekend a month ago, when Romeo went to meet
his sister. He only found out about it after his sister had taken the
overdose of sleeping pills and had died, and the weekend was the reason.
It seems Romeo had waited until the weekend was over before he told her
that he didn’t intend to see her again. That was Romeo, all right. Take
your cake and hand it back, too.

Finally Big Dome Craig ran down and just sat there, strangely relieved.

It was a long time later, after they’d flagged a passing car and were
waiting for the tow truck, that Coach McGurk said to Paul Cahill:

“Sorry you had to miss the game, Paul. It was great.”

“That’s okay,” Paul said thoughtfully. “Anyway, we won.” They sat
quietly, then, thinking about winning.



NEED


Some towns seem to defy not only time, but change; when this happens in
the far hinterland, one is hardly amazed. Yet, amazingly, it happens all
the time quite near some of our largest cities. Occasionally one of
these is found by the “project” entrepreneur, and becomes the setting
for winding windrows of coops and hutches, alternately “ranch” and
“split”; yet not even these, and the prefabricated, alien, chain-driven
supercilious superservice shopping centers in symbiosis with them, ever
become a part of such towns. Whatever span of years it takes to make the
“projects” obsolescent only serves to make these towns themselves more
solid, more—in the chemical sense—set. Modernity does not and cannot
alter the character of such a place, any more than one might alter a
suit of chain mail by topping it with a Panama hat.

In such towns are businesses—shops and services—which live as the
unassailable town lives, that is to say, in their own way and forever.
Purveyors of the same shoes, sheets and sundries as the multi-celled
merchandizing mammoths sell go by the board, quite deserving of all that
their critics say of them, that they can’t keep up with the times, that
they’re dead and now must lie down. Defiance of time, of change, of
anything is, after all, only defiance, and does not in itself guarantee
a victory. But certain businesses, by their very nature, may be in a
town, may _be_ a town and achieve this defiant immortality. Anyone who
has reflected with enough detachment on recent history is in a position
to realize that, in revolutionary days, there must have been a certain
market for genuine antiques made in America of American materials more
than a century earlier. No technology advancing or static can eliminate
the window-washer, the launderer, the handyman-smith and their
establishments. Fashions in invention might change the vestments of
their activity, but never their blood and marrow. The boatwright becomes
a specialist in wooden station-wagon bodies, and then in mobile-home
interiors. The blacksmith trades his leather bellows for a drill-press
and a rack of epoxy resins, but he is what he was, and his shop is his
permanence and his town’s.

The general store has passed into the hands of the chains. It, and they,
pursue the grail of _everything_, and since to be able to sell
everything is on the face of it impossible, they are as impermanent as a
military dictatorship that must expand or die, and that dies expanding.
But there is another kind of store that sells, not everything, but
_anything_. Its hallmark is that it has no grail at all, and therefore
no pursuit. It emphatically does not expand. Its stock is that which has
been useful or desirable to some people at some time; its only credo,
that anything which has been useful or desirable to some people at some
time will again be useful to someone—anything. Here you might find dried
flowers under a glass dome, a hand-cranked coffee mill, a toy piano, a
two-volume, leather-bound copy of _Dibdin’s Journey_, a pair of
two-wheel roller skates or a one tube radio set—the tube is a UX-II and
is missing—which tunes with a vario-coupler. You might—you probably
would—also find in such a place, a proprietor who could fix almost
anything and has the tools to do it with, and who understands that
conversation is important and the most important part of it is
listening.

Such a town was North Nyack, New York, barely twenty miles from
Manhattan, yet—but for superficial scratches—untouched and unchangeable.
It contained such a business, the Anything Shoppe—a title that
constituted one of the scratches, being a concession to the transient
trade, but one that did not bleed—and such a proprietor. His name was
Noat, George Noat. G-Note, naturally, to his friends, who were all the
people who knew him. He was the ugliest man in town, but that, like the
silliness of his concern’s name, was only skin-deep.

Why such a trade should be his, or why he was its, might make for some
interesting discussion of cause and effect. The fact—which would
contribute nothing to the discussion—remained that there was an
_anythingness_ about G-Note; not only would he buy anything, sell
anything or fix anything, he would also listen to anyone, help anyone
and, from the depths of a truly extraordinary well of the quality called
empathy—the ability to feel with another’s fingertips, look out through
another pair of eyes—he could understand.

To George Noat, Prop., then, at twenty minutes to three one stormy
morning, came Gorwing.

“G-Note!” Gorwing roared, pounding on the front door of the Anything
Shoppe with force enough to set adance the two sets of pony harness and
the cabbage grater that hung against it. “G-Note, Goddammit!”

A dim light appeared in the back of the shop, and G-Note’s grotesque
face and one T-shirted shoulder, over which a big square hand was
pulling a gallus-strap, appeared at the edge of the baize curtain that
separated G-Note’s working from G-Note’s living—the most partial of
barriers, which suited him. He called, “It’s open!” semaphored and
withdrew.

Gorwing, small, quick, black hair, snapping black voice and eyes, sharp
white teeth, slammed into the shop. The vibration set a clothing-dummy,
atop which was perched a rubber imp carnival mask, teetering, and it
turned as it teetered, bearing round on Gorwing indignantly. He and it
stared one another in the eye for an angry moment, and then he cursed
and snatched off the head and threw it behind the counter. “G-Note!” he
barked.

G-Note shuffled into the shop, shrugging into a shawl-like grey cardigan
and, with his heavy lids, wringing sleep out of his eyes. “I got that
toilet you wanted yesterday,” he mumbled. “Real tall, with pink rosebuds
on. I bet there wouldn’t be another like it from here to—”

“The hell with it,” said Gorwing. “That was yesterday. Come on, willya?”

G-Note blinked at him. “Come?”

“The car, in the car!” Gorwing half cried, in the tones of excessive
annoyance applied usually to people who should know by now. It was
unfair, because by now G-Note did not know. “Hurry up, willya? What do I
hafta do to make you hurry up?”

Gorwing flung open the door, and G-Note peered out into sodden blowing
black. “It’s raining out.”

Gorwing’s tight lips emitted a single sibilant explosion, and he raced
out, leaving the door open. A moment later there came the sound of a car
door slamming. G-Note shrugged and followed, closing the door behind
him, and, hunching his shoulders against the driving rain, made his way
out to the car. Gorwing had started it and switched on the lights while
he was negotiating the puddles, then flung open the door on the driver’s
side and slid over into the passenger’s seat. He shouted something.

“Huh?” G-Note grunted as he came poking and dripping into the car.

“I said Essex Street and Storms Road, right by the traffic light, and
get _goin’_, willya?”

G-Note got himself settled and got going. “Gosh, Gorwing,” he said,
protesting gently.

“Quitcher bitchin’,” said Gorwing through clamped teeth and curled lips.
“Tromp down on that thing.”

“Where we goin’?”

“I told you.”

“Yeah, but—”

“You’ll see when we get there. There’s some money in it. You think I’d
come out on a night like this if there wasn’t some money in it? Listen,
G-Note—” He paused with a mechanical abruptness, as if the machine gun
with which he fired his words had jammed.

“What?”

Unjammed as suddenly, Gorwing shot: “You wouldn’t let me down.”

“No, I won’t do that, but I wish I knew what I was ’sposed to do.”

They sloshed over the high crown of Storms Hill and down the winding
slope on the other side. The slick blacktop showed the loom of lights
ahead before they saw the lights themselves—gold tinged with green,
suddenly with ruby; the intersection and the traffic signal.

“Cut him out. _Quick!_ Don’t let’m pick up that guy.”

Peering ahead, G-Note saw a car slowing for a waving figure who stood at
the far side of the intersection. G-Note seemed not to have heard
Gorwing’s crackling order, or to have understood; yet it was as if his
hands and feet had. The car lurched forward, cut in to the curb at the
right of the other, and almost alongside. Startled, the other driver
shifted and pulled away up the hill. At Gorwing’s grunted order, G-Note
stopped at the curb by the sodden and obviously bewildered pedestrian
who had been trying to flag the other car. The man bent and tried to
peer into the dark interior. Gorwing rolled down his window.

The man said, “Can you give me a lift?”

Gorwing reached back and opened the rear door, and the man plunged in.
“Thank God,” he panted, slamming the door. “I’ve got to get home, but I
mean quick. You going near Rockland Lake?”

“We’re going anywhere you say, mister,” said Gorwing. “But it’ll cost.”

“Oh, that’s all right. You’re a taxi, hm?”

“We are now.” Gorwing’s hard hand took G-Note’s elbow, squeezed, warned;
but, warning or no, G-Note gasped at what came next: “Rockland Lake
costs one hundred bucks from here.”

G-Note’s gasp was quite lost in the newcomer’s wordless and indignant
sound.

“What’s the matter,” Gorwing rasped, “can’t raise it?”

“What kind of a holdup is this?” squeaked the man.

For the second time Gorwing reached back and swung the rear door open.
Then he stretched across G-Note and shut off the motor. In the sudden
silence, the sluicing of rain across the roof and the passenger’s angry
breath seemed too loud. Gorwing said, at a quarter the volume and twice
the rasp, “I don’t much go for that holdup talk.”

The man plunged up and out-half out. He stood, with one foot still in
the car, and looked up the road and down the road. Nothing moved but the
rain. Clearly, they heard the relay in the traffic light saying _clock,
chuck!_ as the dim sodden shine of the intersection turned from green to
red. To anyone thinking of traffic and transport, it was a persuasive
sight. At three in the morning, chances of anything passing before
daylight were remote.

He put his head back in. “Look, whoever you are, I’ve just got to get to
Rockland Lake.”

“So by now,” said Gorwing, “we would be past Hook Mountain Road more’n
halfway there. But you want to talk.”

The man made his inarticulate sound and got back in. “Go ahead.”

Gorwing, with a touch, checked G-Note’s move toward the ignition. “A
hundred bucks?”

“Yes, damn you!”

Gorwing turned the dome light on. “Take a good careful look at him,” he
said. Since he might have said it to either of them, they necessarily
looked at one another, G-Note twisting around in his seat to look back,
the passenger huddled sullen and glaring in the rear corner. G-Note saw
a softhanded petulant man in his early thirties, with very fine, rather
receding reddish hair and surprisingly bright blue eyes.

G-Note’s great ugly head loomed over him like an approaching rockfall.
The domelight, almost directly overhead, accentuated the heavy ridges of
bone over his eyes, leaving the eyes themselves all but invisible in
their caves. It gleamed from the strong fleshy arches that walled his
wide nostrils and conceal the soft sensitivity of his thin upper lip
while making the most of the muscular protruding underlip.

“You’ll pay,” said Gorwing, grinning wolfishly and switching off the
light. “Drive,” he said, nudging G-Note. He laughed. “I got a witness
and you ain’t,” he said cheerfully.

“Just hurry,” said the passenger.

G-Note, wondering more than anything else at the first laugh he had ever
heard from Gorwing, drove. He said, unhappily, “This ain’t a fun one,
this time.”

“Shut up,” Gorwing said.

“Can’t you go any faster?” cried the passenger.

He got no response. Only the anxious would feel that this skilled
hurtling was not fast enough. No object, including an automobile, was
inanimate with G-Note’s big hands upon it; this one moved as if it knew
its own way and its own weight.

“In here,” said the passenger.

“I always wondered,” said Gorwing. His meaning was clear. Many must have
wondered just who lived behind these stone posts, these arresting NO
ADMITTANCE and PRIVATE ROAD, KEEP OUT and NO TURNING and DEAD END ROAD
signs. The drive climbed, turning, and in fifty yards one would have
thought the arterial road below had ceased to exist. They came to a T.
Neat little signs with arrows said SMITH on the left and POLLARD on the
right. “Left,” said the passenger.

They climbed again, and abruptly the road was manicured, rolled, tended,
neat. “This will do.”

There was a turn-around; the drive continued, apparently to a garage
somewhere. In the howling wet, there was the shadowed white mass of a
house. The man opened the door.

“A hundred bucks,” Gorwing said.

The man took out his wallet. Gorwing turned on the dome

“I have only twenty here. Twenty-one.”

“You got it inside.” It could have been a question.

“Damn it!” the man flared. “Four lousy miles!”

“You was in a awful hurry,” Gorwing drawled. He took the twenty, and the
one, out of the man’s hand. “I want the rest of it.”

The man got out of the car and backed off into the rain. From about
forty feet, he shrieked at them. He meant, undoubtedly, to roar like a
lion, but his voice broke and he shrieked. “Well, I won’t pay it!” and
then he ran like a rabbit.

“Yes you will!” Gorwing bellowed. He slammed the back door of the car,
which, if heard by the fleeing man, must have doubled his speed.

“Don’t go out in that,” said G-Note.

“Oh, I ain’t about to,” said Gorwing. “He’ll pay in the morning. He’ll
pay you.”

“Me?”

“You drop me off home and then come back and park here,” said Gorwing.
“Don’t for Pete’s sake go back to bed. You want to sleep any more, you
do it right here. When he sees you he’ll pay. You won’t have to say
nothing. Just be here.”

G-Note started the car and backed, turning. “Oh, why not just let it go?
You got more than it’s worth.”

Gorwing made a laughing noise. This was not the laugh that had amazed
G-Note before; it was the one that G-Note had thought was all the
laughter Gorwing had. It was also all the answer Gorwing would offer.

G-Note said, sadly, “You _like_ doing this to that fellow.”

Gorwing glanced at the road-signs as they pulled out of the driveway.
“Private Road,” he read aloud, but not very. It was as if to say, “He
can afford it.”

“Well,” said G-Note again, as they neared North Nyack, “This ain’t a fun
one, this time.”

There had been “fun ones.” Like the afternoon Gorwing had come roaring
and snapping into his place, just as urgently as he had tonight,
demanding to know if G-Note had a copy of _Trials and Triumphs, My Forty
Years in The Show Business_, by P. T. Barnum; and G-Note had! And they
had tumbled it, with a lot of other old books, into two boxes, and had
driven out to the end of Carrio Lane, where Gorwing just knew there was
somebody who needed the book—not who, not why, just that there was
somebody who needed it—and he and G-Note had stood at opposite sides of
the lane, each with a box of books, and had bellowed at each other, “You
got the P. T. Barnum book over there?” and “I don’t know if I have the
P. T. Barnum book here; have you got the P. T. Barnum book there?” and
“What is the name of the P. T. Barnum book?” and _“Trials and Triumphs,
My Forty Years in The Show Business,”_ and so on, until, sure enough, a
window popped open and a lady called down, “Do one of you men really
have Barnum’s biography there?” and, when they said they had, she said
it was a miracle; she came down and gave them fifteen dollars for it.
And that other time, when at Gorwing’s urgent behest, G-Note had gone on
a hot summer’s day to stand blinking in the sun at Broad and Main
streets, with a heavy ancient hand-cranked music box unwrapped on his
shoulder, and the city man had come running up to him to ask what it
played: _“Skater’s Waltz,”_ G-Note had told him, “and _My Rosary_.”
“I’ll give you a hundred bucks for it,” the man had said, and, when
G-Note’s jaw dropped and fumbled for an astonished word, he’d made it a
hundred and a quarter and had paid it, then and there.

Fun ones, these and others, and it hadn’t mattered that the customers
(or was it victims?) paid exorbitantly. They did it of their own free
will, and they seemed really to _need_ whatever it was. How Gorwing knew
what was needed, and where—but never by whom or why—was a recurrent
mystery; but after a while you stopped asking—because Gorwing wouldn’t
stand catechizing on the subject—and then you stopped wondering; you
just went along with it, the way you do with automatic shifting, the
innards of an IBM machine, or, if you happen not to know, precisely what
chemicals are put into the head of a match to make it light. You don’t
_have_ to know.

But this man, this passenger they’d charged twenty-five dollars per mile
now; it wasn’t fun. He was a guy in trouble if ever G-Note had seen one,
anxious, worried, even frantic—so anxious he’d say yes to a demand like
that, even if he did take it back later; so anxious he was stumbling
homeward through the rain at three in the morning. You should help a
fellow like that, you shouldn’t use his trouble against him. Which
didn’t seem to bother Gorwing, not one bit: coming into the street-lit
area of North Nyack, now, G-Note could glance sidewise at Gorwing’s
face, see the half grin, the cruel white teeth showing. No, it didn’t
bother Gorwing.

So … you found out new things about people all the time. Such a thing
could be surprising, but, if you don’t want surprises like that, you
just keep away from people. Thus G-Note shrugged away the matter, as he
asked, “Where you staying now?” for Gorwing moved around all the time.

“Just drop me off by O’Grady’s.”

O’Grady’s, the poolhall, was across town from G-Note’s place, on the
same avenue; yet, passing his own shop, G-Note turned right and made the
usual wide detour past the hospital. He made a U-turn at the poolhall
and stopped. For a good-night, Gorwing had only, “Now you said you
wouldn’t let me down.”

“All right,” said G-Note.

“Forty-sixty, you and me,” said Gorwing, and turned away.

G-Note drove off.

Eloise Smith hoped Jody wouldn’t be mad. His was not the towering rage
of this one nor the sullen grumps of that one, but a waspish, petty,
verbose kind of anger, which she had neither the wit nor the words to
cope with. She loved Jody and tried her very best to have everything the
way he wanted it, but it was hard, sometimes, to know what would annoy
him. And when anything did, sometimes she had to go through an hour or
more of his darting, flicking admonishments before she even knew what it
was.

She’d broken the telephone. Kicked the wire right out of the wall—oh,
how _clumsy!_ But she’d done worse than that from time to time, and he’d
just laughed. Or she’d done much less serious things and he’d carried on
just terrible. Well … she’d just have to wait and see. She hoped she
could stay awake, waiting—goodness, he was late. Elks nights were always
the latest; he was secretary, and was always left to lock the hall after
the meeting. But he usually got home by two anyway—it was three already,
and still no sign of—oh—_there_ he …

She ran and opened the door. He spun in, dripping, out of breath. He
slammed the door and shot the bolt, and pushed past her to peer out the
front window. Not that anything could be seen out there. He turned from
the window. He looked wild. She stood before him, clutching her negligee
against her breast.

“Eloise … you all right?”

“All right? Why, of course I’m all right!”

“ ‘Thank God?” He pushed past her again, darted to the living room door,
flicked his gaze across and back. “You all alone?”

“Well, not since you got here,” she said, in a hopeless attempt to
produce some levity. “Here, you’re wet through. Give me your hat. You
poor—”

“It might interest you to know … you’ve driven me half out … of my
mind,” he panted. She had never seen him like this. He might be a little
short of breath from running from the car to the house, but not this
much, and it should be, well, tapering off. It wasn’t. It seemed to get
more marked as he talked. He was very pale. His red-rimmed eyes and the
rain running off his bland features gave him the ludicrous expression of
a five-year-old who has bumped his head and is trying not to cry. She
followed him into the living room and rounded on him, to face him, and
for the third time he pushed past her, this time to fling open the
dining room door. She said timidly, “Jody, I broke the telephone. I
mean, I fell over the wire and it came out.”

“Oh, you did, did you.”

He was still panting. “Jody!” she cried, “whatever is the matter? What’s
_happened?_”

“Oh, what’s happened?” he barked. His eyes were too round. “I call you
up and somebody cuts the wire, as far as I know. I rush out of the hall
to the car and the door slams behind me, that’s all. My keys on the
table. Can’t get back in, can’t start the car. Try my best to get here
quickly. Hitchhiking. Get waylaid by a couple of the ugliest hoodlums
you ever saw, they _robbed_ me.”

“Oh dear—did they hurt you, honey?”

“They did not. Matter of fact,” he panted, “I told them off, but good.
And they better not fool with me again. Not that they will—I guess they
learned their lesson.” Angrily, proudly, he hitched his shoulders, a
gesture that made him aware of his wet coat, which at last he began to
remove. She ran to help him. “Oh Jody, Jody darling, but you didn’t have
to rush back like that …”

“Didn’t I,” he said solemnly, in a tone dripping with meaning, not one
whit of which she understood. He pulled himself, glaring, away from her,
and, while she stood clutching her negligee to herself again, he
ponderously took off the coat, glaring at her.

“Oh, I’m so sorry. You poor dear.” She thought, suddenly, of a woman she
had seen in the parking lot at the supermarket, whose child had bolted
in front of a car. People had shrieked, brakes had squealed, the woman
had run out to scoop up her frightened but unharmed youngster—and, in
her relief, had whaled the tar out of him.

That was it—Jody had been so terribly worried about her, he’d gotten
into all this trouble rushing to help her, and now that he knew she was
safe he was, in effect, spanking her.

She grew very tender, very patient. “Oh _Jody_ …” she said fondly.

“You won’t ‘Oh Jody’ out of this one,” he said.

“Well, I’m _sorry!_” she cried, and, “Oh, Jody, what is it? Is it the
telephone? Will it be hard to get it fixed?”

“The _telephone_ can be fixed,” he growled in a voice again inexplicably
loaded with meaning. He passed through the dining room into the kitchen,
again flicking his glance here, there, up, across. “Got everything put
away,” he said, looking at the glass cupboard, the dish shelf.

“Well, don’t I always?”

“Doubtless,” he said bitterly. He opened the refrigerator.

“Let me fix—”

“I’ll do it myself,” he said.

Her tenderness and patience gave out at that point. She said in a small
voice, “I’ll go to bed then,” and when he did not respond, she went
upstairs, lay down and cried.

She managed to be silent, stiff and silent, when he came upstairs, and
lay in the dark with her eyes squeezed shut while he undressed and
washed and got into his pajamas and into the other bed. She dearly hoped
he’d say something, but he didn’t. After a long time, she whispered,
“Well, good night, Jody.” He made a sound which might have been an
offensive “Ha!” or just a grunt; she couldn’t be sure. She thought he
fell asleep after a while, and then she did, too—lightly, troubled.

The glare of her bed lamp awoke her. Up through it, and up through the
confusion of puzzlement and sleepiness, she blinked at Jody. Seen so,
standing by her bed and glaring down at her, he looked very large. He
never had before.

He said, “You’d better tell me all about it right now.”

She said, “Wh-what time is it?”

“Now you listen to me, Eloise. I’ve learned a whole lot of things in the
last few hours. About you. About me. About—” Suddenly he raised his
voice; at the rim of the glare of light, the vein at the side of his
neck swelled. “I’m just too doggoned nice to everybody. When I told off
those thugs, I tell you, something happened to me, and from now on I
won’t stand for it any more!”

“Jody—”

“Two of them, twice my size, and I told _them_.”

“You did?”

In retrospect, Eloise was to look painfully back upon this moment and
realize that on it turned everything that subsequently happened between
them; she would realize that when she said, “You _did?_” he heard “_You_
did?”—a difference in inflection that becomes less subtle the more one
thinks about it. Later, she thought a great deal about it; now, however,
she could only shrink numbly down into the covers as he roared, “Yes,
_I_ did! You didn’t think I had it in me, did you? Well I did, and from
now on nobody puts anything over on me! Including you, you hear?”

“But Jody—I—”

“Who was here when I called you up at two o’clock?”

“Who was—Nobody!”

He sank down to the edge of his bed so their heads were more nearly on a
level, and fixed her with a pink-rimmed, weepy, steely gaze.
“I … heard … you,” he intoned.

“You mean when you called?”

He simply sat there with his unchanging, unnatural glare. Wonderingly,
frightened, she shook her head. “I was watching a movie on TV. It was
just ending—the very end; it was a good one. And I—I—”

“You told your … your …” He could not say the word. “You told whoever it
was not to talk. _But I heard you_.”

Dazedly she sat up in bed, a slim, large-eyed, dark-blonde woman in her
late twenties—frightened, deeply puzzled, warding off certain hurt. She
thought hard, and said, “I spoke to _you_—I said that to you! In the
picture, you see, there was this girl that … that … Oh, never mind; it’s
just that in that last moment of the picture everything came together,
like. And just as you rang and I picked up the phone, it was the last
minute of the picture, don’t you see? I was sort of into it—you know. So
I said to you, ‘Don’t say anything for a second, honey,’ and I—Is that
what you heard?”

“That is what I heard,” he said coldly.

She laughed with relief. “I said it to you, to you, not to anyone here,
you silly! And—well, I was sort of mixed up, coming out of the TV that
way, to the phone, and you began to sort of shout at me, and I couldn’t
hear the TV, and I kind of ran to it to turn it up, just for a second,
and I forgot I was holding the phone and the wire caught my ankle and I
fell down and the wire pulled out and_—Jody!_” she cried, seeing his
face.

“You’re a liar, you bitch.”

“Jody!” she whispered faintly. Slowly she lay down again. She closed her
eyes, and tears crept from beneath her lids. She made no sound.

“I can handle hoodlums and I can handle you,” he said flatly, and turned
out the light. “And from now on,” he added, as if it were a complete
statement; he must have thought so, for he said nothing more that night.

Eloise Smith lay trembling, her mind assuring her over and over that
none of this was really happening, it couldn’t happen. After a useless
time of that, she began to piece the thing together, what he’d said,
what she’d said … she recalled suddenly what he had blurted out about
the Elks’ Hall, and the car, and all … what was it? Oh: he’d called,
apparently to tell her he was on the way; and she’d murmured, “Don’t say
anything for a second, honey,” and he’d thought … he must have thought
oh dear, how _silly_ of him! “Jody!” she said, sitting up, and then the
sight of his dim rigid form, curled away from her in the other bed,
drove her back to silence, and she lay down to think it through some
more … And he’d gotten himself all upset and yelled, and then she’d
broken the wire, and probably thought her—_her_—but she could not think
the word any more than he had been able to say it—he’d thought that
whoever it was had gaily pulled out the wire to, well, stop his
interruption. And then apparently Jody had gone all panicky and berserk,
had run straight out to the car, got himself locked out of the Elks’
Hall with the car keys still inside, had headed north—away from town,
and gas stations, and other telephones—and had tried to hitchhike home.
And something about hoodlums and being robbed on the way—but then he
said he’d driven them off, didn’t he?

She gave it up at length. Whatever had happened to him, he obviously
felt like a giant, or a giant-killer maybe, for the first time in his
life, and he was taking it out on her.

Well, maybe in the morning—

In the morning he was even worse. He hardly spoke to her at all. Just
watched her every minute, and once in a while snorted disgustedly.
Eloise moved quickly with poached egg, muffin, coffee, marmalade;
sleepless, shaken, she would know what to do, take a stand, have a
sensible thought, even—later; not now.

Watching her, Jody wiped his lips, threw down his napkin and stood up.
“I’m going for the car. If you’re thinking of letting anybody in, well,
look out, that’s all. You don’t know when I’ll be back.”

“Jody, Jody!” she wailed, “I never! I _never_, Jody!”

He walked past her, smiling tightly, and got his other hat. “Oh boy,” he
said to the cosmos, “I just hope I run across one of those thugs again,
that’s what I hope.” He banged the hat with the edge of his hand, and
set it uncharacteristically at a rakish slant on his head. Numbly, she
followed him to the door and stood in it, watching him go. He sprang up
the steep driveway like a spring lamb. At the top he turned without
breaking stride and came straight back—but not springing—scuttling would
be the word for it. His face was chalky. He saw her and tried, with some
apparent difficulty, to regain his swagger. “Forgot to call the phone
company. Get a taxi, too.”

“You can’t,” she said. “I broke the wire.”

“I know, I know!” he snapped waspishly, though she felt he had forgotten
it. “I’ll call from Pollard’s.” He glanced quickly over his shoulder, up
the driveway, and then plunged across the lawn and through the wet
shrubbery toward their only neighbor’s home.

She looked after him in amazement, and then up the drive. Over its
crest, she could see the roof of a car, obviously parked in their
turn-around. She was curious, but too much was happening; she would not
dare climb the drive to see who it was. Instead she went in and closed
the door and climbed upstairs, where she could see from the bedroom
windows. From this elevation, the car was plainly visible. It wasn’t
theirs. Also visible was the ugly giant lounging tiredly against the
car, watching the house.

She shrank behind the curtain and put all her left fingers in her mouth.

After a time she saw Jody plunging across the long grass of the vacant
acre that lay between their place and Pollard’s. He pushed through the
shrubs at the edge of the lawn, stopped to paddle uselessly at his damp
trouser-legs and then sidled over to the driveway. He peeped around the
hollyhocks until he could look up the drive. The ugly man had apparently
detected some movement, for he stood up straight and peered. Jody shrank
back behind the hollyhocks.

She thought then that he might come in, but instead he crouched there.
There was a long—to Eloise, an interminable—wait. Then a taxi pulled in
from the road and turned to stop next to the other car. Jody
straightened up and began trotting up the drive. The ugly man leaned his
elbows on the lower edge of the taxi driver’s window—he had to bend
nearly double to do it—and began speaking to him. Of course she could
not hear a word, but the ugly man and the driver seemed to be laughing.
Then the ugly man reached in, slapped the driver cheerfully on the
shoulder and stood back. The taxi started up, backed around and pulled
out of the drive. Jody, seeing this, for the second time made a U-turn
and scuttled back to his hiding place behind the hollyhocks. He looked
very little like a man who was overanxious to meet some thugs.

Eloise moved closer to the window in order to see him better, for he was
almost straight down beneath her. Perhaps he caught the movement out of
the corner of his eye, or perhaps some sixth sense … anyway, he glanced
up, and for a moment looked more miserable than a human being ought,
caught like that—chagrined, embarrassed. Then, visibly, he began to grow
angry again; it began with her, she could see that. Then he wheeled and
marched up the drive like a condemned man ascending the scaffold. The
ugly man opened the right front door of his old sedan, and Jody got in.

For a long time Eloise Smith stood in the window, kneading her elbows
and frowning. Then, slowly, she went downstairs and began to write a
letter.

Smith’s posture of pugnacious defiance lasted from the turn-around to
the private road he shared with Pollard. Once out of sight of the house,
he slumped unhappily into the corner of his seat and stole a quick
glance at his captor.

The man was even bigger, and considerably uglier, in daylight than he
had been in the dark. He said, “I sent away your taxi. He didn’t mind.
He’s an old buddy of mine.”

“Oh,” said Jody.

He watched the scenery go by, and thought of how gentle the man’s voice
was. Very soft and gentle. Into this Jody Smith built vast menace. After
a while he said sulkily, “This going to cost me another hundred?”

“Oh gosh no,” said the ugly man. “You bought a round trip. Where do you
want to go?”

Cat-and-mouse, thought Jody. Trying to get my goat. “Got to get my car
at the Elks’ Hall.”

“Okay,” the man said, nodding pleasantly. Deftly, he spun the wheel,
turning into what Smith prided himself as being _his_ short cut to the
Hall. Obviously this creature knew the roads hereabouts.

They came to the built-up area, slid into an alley, crossed two streets
and turned sharp right into the crunchy parking yard at the Elks. There
were two other cars there; one Smith’s, the other obviously the
caretaker’s, for the doors stood open and the old man was sweeping the
step.

Timidly, Smith touched the door handle. The ugly man sat still, big
gnarled hands on the wheel, eyes straight ahead. Smith opened the door
and said, “… well—” Then, incredulous, he got out. The ugly man made no
attempt to stop him.

Smith actually got two paces away from the car before sheer compulsive
curiosity got the better of him. He went back and said, “Look, what
about this money? You don’t really expect me to pay a hundred dollars
for that ride.”

“I don’t,” said the big man, “Gorwing, I guess he does.”

“Gorwing. Is that the little ape that—”

“He’s a friend of mine,” said the giant, not loudly, but just quickly.
Smith dropped that tactic, and asked, “You work for him?”

“With, not for. Sometimes.”

“But you’re doing the collecting.”

“Look,” said the ugly one, suddenly, “Gorwing, he wants sixty per cent
of that money. Well, I wouldn’t let him down. For me, I don’t want it.
Now, how much did he get off you last night?”

“Twenty-one.”

“From sixty is thirty-nine. You got thirty-nine bucks?”

“Not on me.” Astonished, he looked at the grotesque face. “Tell me
something. What would you do if I wouldn’t give you another penny?”

The man looked at his gnarled hands, which twisted on the wheel. “I
guess I’d just have to put it up myself.”

Smith got back in. “Run me over to the bank.”

The man made no comment, but started his engine.

“What’s your name?” asked Smith as they stopped for a light a block
away.

“George Noat.”

“Aren’t you afraid I’ll go to the police?”

“Nope.”

Smith recalled then, forcefully, what Gorwing had said: “I got a witness
and you haven’t.” He imagined himself trying to explain what had
happened to a desk sergeant, who would be trying to write it all down in
a book. Outrageous, certainly—but he had gotten into the car of his own
free will, he had agreed to pay.

“How did you happen to come along when you did last night?”

“Just driving by.”

Smith found the answer unsatisfying, and he could not say why. He said,
sulkily, “Friend or not, I’ve got to say that your Gorwing is a bandit.”

“No he ain’t,” said George Noat mildly. “Not when all he does is get
things people really need. You really need something, you pay for it,
right?”

“Yes, I suppose you—”

“And if you need something, and a fellow delivers it, nobody’s getting
robbed.”

At that moment they came to the bank, and the subject was lost.

Jody Smith lived with the letter for a long time.

_Dear Jody_,

_After the way you acted last night I don’t know what to do except I
have to go away from you. You have to trust a person. I always believed
you but why did you make up all that about Mr. Noat I know him a long
time and he is about the kindest man who ever lived he wouldn’t hurt a
fly_.

_I want you to think about one thing you said a lot about me and some
man and all that, well I want you to know that there isn’t any man at
all and now that means your wife left you and there wasn’t even any
other man. I bet now you wish there was. I wish there was. No I don’t
Jody, oh my goodness I wish I could write a letter I never could you
know, but I can’t stay here any more. Maybe you could find somebody
better I guess you better I won’t stand in your way because I still want
you to be happy_.

_Eloise_

_Tell the market not to send the order I sent yesterday. We were
supposed to have dinner at the Stewarts Tuesday. I can’t think of
anything else_.

Now Jodham Swaine Smith was a man of independent means—this was the
phrase with which on occasion he described himself to himself. His
parents had both come from well-to-do families, but Smith was two
generations—three, on his mother’s side—removed from the kind of
fortune-getting that had gotten these fortunes; latterly, it had become
the Smith tradition to treat the principal as if it did not exist, and
live modestly on the interest.

Independent means. Such independence means all Four Freedoms plus a good
many more. Small prep schools—in small towns and with, comparatively,
small fees—gray as Groton, followed by tiny, honored colleges on which
the ivy, if not the patina, is quite as real as Harvard’s, make it
possible to grow up in one of the most awesome independencies of all,
the freedom from Life. In most cases it takes but six or so
post-graduate weeks for trauma and tragedy to set in, and for the
discoveries to be made that business is not necessarily conducted on the
honor system, that the reward for dutifully reporting the errors of the
erring gets you, not a mark toward your Good Citizen Button, but
something more like a kick in the teeth, and finally, that the world is
full of people who never heard of your family and wouldn’t give a damn
if they had.

Yet for those few who are enabled by, on the one hand, the effortless
accumulation of dividends, and on the other, an absence of personal
talent or ambition that might be challenged, it is possible to slip into
a surrogate of man’s estate in its subjective aspects hardly different
from the weatherproof confines of the exclusive neighborhood, the
private school and the honored and unheard-of college. Jody Smith was
one of these few.

Not that he didn’t face the world, just as squarely and as valiantly as
he had been taught to do. But it happened that, all unknowing, he gave
the world nothing worth abrading, and the world was therefore, as far as
he could know, a smooth place to live with. In no sense did he withdraw
from life. On the contrary, he sought out the centers of motion, and
involved himself as completely as possible with the Elks, the Rotary,
the Lions, and the Civic Improvement League. Strangely enough, these
gatherings, filled as they were with real people, gave him no evidence
of the existence of a real world. Jody Smith was always available for
the Thanksgiving Dance Committee and Operation Santa Claus, but did not
submit himself, and was somehow never proposed, for any chairmanship. In
a word, he wasn’t competition for anyone.

And he had gravitated to that same strange other- or no-world in what
might laughingly be called his business. He was a philatelist. He ran
small classified advertisements in the do-it-yourself and other
magazines on a contract basis, and handled the trickle of mail from his
little den at home. He made money at it. He also lost money at it. In
the aggregate, he probably lost more than he made, but not enough to
jeopardize his small but adequate and utterly predictable income.

He had, from time to time, wanted this or that. He had never for a
moment _needed_, anything. Eloise, for example—he had wanted her, or
perhaps it was to be married to her, but he hadn’t needed to. She helped
him with his business, typing out some of the correspondence from form
letters he had composed, and moistening stamp hinges. But he did not
need her help. He did not need her.

Not even when she left. For a while. Weeks, in fact. And even then at
first it was want, not need, and even then the want was to create some
circumstance that would make her realize how wrong she had been. Then
the wants widened, somehow. The television and the stamp hinges seemed
after a time to be inadequate to fill the long evenings or to occupy the
silence of the house. When no hand but his own moved anything about him,
his hat would not go of itself into the closet but remained on hall
tables where he himself had put it. And, where at first he had rather
admired himself for his cookery, for he was a methodical, meticulous,
and, as far as cookbooks were concerned, obedient person, he began
slowly to resent the kitchen and even the animal beneath his belt which
with such implacability drove him into it. It seemed to him a double
burden—that he should have to put in all that time before a meal, and
then have nothing ready until he prepared it himself. To do things in
order to make lunchtime come seemed ultimately enough, more than enough,
for a man to be burdened with. Then to have to do things to make the
lunch itself seemed an intolerable injustice.

These matters of convenience—and lack of it—grew into nuisances and
then, like the pebble in the shoe, like the inability to turn over even
in the most comfortable of beds, into sheer torture.

The breaking point came, oddly enough, not in the long night hours with
the empty bed beside his, nor in some dream-wracked and disoriented
morning, but in the middle of an otherwise pleasant afternoon. He had
just received the new Scott’s catalog, and wanted to compare something
in it with the 1954 edition. He couldn’t find the 1954 edition, and he
called out:

“Eloise—”

The sound of his own voice, and of her name, made something happen like
the tearing of a membrane. It tore so completely, and with such
suddenness and agony, that he grunted aloud and fell back on the couch.
He sat there for a moment weaving, and his mouth grew crooked and his
eyes pink, and there came a warning sting at the very back of the roof
of his mouth that astonishingly informed him, as it hardly had since he
was nine years old, that he was about to cry.

He didn’t cry, beyond once whimpering, “Eloise?” in a soprano
half-whisper; then for a long time he sat silent and stunned, wondering
numbly how such a force could have remained coiled so tightly within
him, undetected.

When he could, he began to take stock. It was a matter of weeks—six of
them, seven—since she had left, and not once had he examined his acts
and attitude. He had done nothing about locating her, though in that
department there was little to be done—he simply did not know where she
was. Her only relative was an aging mother in a rest home out West, and
she certainly had not gone there. He had not destroyed her letter, but
he hadn’t reread it either, nor thought about its contents. He hadn’t
wanted to think about these things, he now knew. He had thought … he
hadn’t _needed_ to.

He needed to now, and he did. The letter gave him nothing at first but a
feeling—not quite anger—more like a sullen distaste for himself. And one
more thing, slightest of handholds—she apparently, somehow or other,
knew George Noat.

And, on that slender evidence, he tore out of the house and got into his
car.

Nothing was the way it should be. The trail was not obscure. The
taxi-driver—Noat had said he was “an old buddy”—told him immediately
where Noat and his business were, and there were no obstacles to his
finding the place—it was within three blocks of the Elks’ Hall. The fact
that never once in Elks or Lions or Rotary had he heard Noat’s name was
only surprising, not mysterious: such establishments as the Anything
Shoppe look back, not forward, and are not found on the lists of
forward-looking organizations.

It was only in the subdued light of the shop(pe), with the old-fashioned
spring-swung doorbell still jangling behind him, that Jodham Swaine
Smith realized that, though intuition and evidence had brought him here,
they had not supplied him with the right thing to say. “Mr. Noat!” he
bleated urgently, and then dried up altogether.

The proprietor glanced up at him from his work, and said easily, “Oh,
hi. Give a hand here, will you?”

Annoyed, which was uncharacteristic of him, and simultaneously much more
timid than he ever remembered being, Jody Smith edged around the
counter. Noat was squatting before an inverted kitchen chair, painted
flat red, with a broken spoke and a split seat-board. “Just grab holt
here,” he invited. Smith took the legs as indicated and squeezed them
together, while Noat drove in corrugated fasteners. “Nothing wrong with
the chair,” said Noat philosophically between hammer blows. “It’s
people. People busted this chair. As for fixing it, if people had sense
enough to have four arms like this thing has four legs, why, I wouldn’t
have to call on my neighbors. You like people?”

The direct question startled Smith; he had been about to interrupt, and
was only half following what the big man said. He made a weak uncertain
laugh, very like that of Sir Laurence in the Graveyard Scene, and said,
“Sure. Sure I do.”

He stood back while Noat turned the chair upright, set it on the counter
and measured the missing spoke with an ancient and frayed dressmaker’s
tape. “You got to make allowances,” Noat said to the tape. “This old
thing’s stretched, but you see I know just how much it’s stretched. 14
inches here is 14 and 17/32nds actual. That’s one way to make
allowances. Then,” he went on, laying the tape against a piece of square
stock that was chucked in a highly individual wood lathe, “if the tape
says 14 on the chair, and I mark it the same 14 on the lumber, it comes
out right and it makes no never mind what it is actual. People,” he
said, rounding at last on Smith, who prepared himself for some profound
truth, “fret too much.”

Smith lived for a moment with that feeling one has when mounting ten
steps in the dark, then discovers there are only nine stairs. He grasped
wildly at what he thought the man had been talking about. “People are
all right. I mean, I like people.”

Noat considered this, or a turning chisel he had obviously made from an
old screwdriver, carefully. Smith could not stand the contemplative
silence, and ran on. “Why, I do everything for people. I join every club
or lodge in town that does any good for people, and I work hard at it. I
guess I wouldn’t do that if I didn’t like people.”

“You don’t do that for yourself.” It was, if a statement, agreement and
a compliment; if a question, a searching, even embarrassing one, calling
for more insight than Smith had or dared to have. It was voiced as a
statement, but so nearly as a question that Smith could not be sure. He
was, however, too honest a person to grasp at the compliment … and if he
rejected it, he must be embarrassed, even insulted, and walk out … but
he couldn’t walk out until he—“You know my wife, don’t you?”

“Sure do. A very nice little lady.”

He started the lathe. It made a very strange sound. The power looked
like that from an ancient upright vacuum cleaner. Reduction was
accomplished through gears that could only have come from one of those
hand-operated coffee mills that used, with their great urn-shaped
hoppers and scroll-spoked, cast-iron scarlet flywheels, to grace chain
markets before they became supered. The frame was that of a
treadle-operated sewing machine, complete with treadle, which, never
having been disconnected, now disappeared in a blur of oscillation that
transferred itself gently to everything in the place. One could not see
it, but it was there in the soles of the feet, in the microscopic
erection of the fibers in a dusty feather boa, in the way sun-captured
dust motes marched instead of wandered. The lathe’s spur-center seemed
to have been the business end of a planing attachment from some
forgotten drill press; it was chucked into a collet that seemed to have
been handmade out of rock maple. The cup center, at the other end,
turned freely and true in what could be nothing else but a roller-skate
wheel. Noat set his ground-down screwdriver on the long tool rest, which
was of a size and massiveness that bespoke a history of
angle-bracketship aboard a hay wagon. On the white wood a whiter line
appeared, and a blizzard of fragrant dust appeared over Noat’s heavy
wrists. He carried the tool along the rest, and the whiter-upon-white
became a band, a sheet. When he had taken it from end to end, he stopped
the machine. The wood was still square, but with all its corners
rounded. Smith tore his fascinated eyes away from it and asked,
wondering if Noat would still know what he was talking about, “How did
you happen to know her?”

“Customer.”

“Really?”

Noat squinted at the display window over the edge of his chisel. “Garlic
press,” he said, and pursed his lips. “Swedish cookie mold, by golly,
she was here seven times over that. Little lady really gets two bits out
of each two dozen pennies.” He laughed quietly; he had a good laugh.
Smith’s solar plexus contained a sudden vacuum at the mention of these
homey, Eloise-y things. “And the egg separators—two hundred egg
separators.”

“_What?_ I never saw—”

“Yes, you did. You went away to some kind of convention, and when you
came back she’d done over the breakfast nook.”

“The textured wall!”

“Yeah, those mash-paper cushions they put between layers in an egg
crate. She cut and fit and put ’em up and painted ’em—what she say?” He
closed his eyes. “Flat purple with dull gold in the middle of each cup.”

“She never told me,” Smith informed himself aloud. “She said
she’d … Well, I guess she didn’t actually _say_. But I got the idea she
saved up from the house money and had it done. She really did it
herself?”

Noat nodded gravely.

“I wonder why she didn’t tell me,” Smith breathed.

“Maybe,” said George Noat, “she thought you might live with a textured
wall where you wouldn’t with egg separators.”

There was a meaning here that he could not—would not—see, but that he
knew would come to him most distastefully later. He compressed his lips.
He had acquired too many things to think about in the last few minutes,
and at least two of them might be insults. He glanced doorward, and said
in farewell tones, “Well, I—” and then the handle of the chisel pressed
into his palm stopped him. “You go on with that. I got to cook some
glue.”

Smith stared with horror at the chisel. “Me run that machine? I never in
my life—”

The giant cupped a hand under his left armpit and propelled him to the
machine. “The one wonderful thing about a lathe, you couldn’t tell a
beginner’s first job from Chippendale’s last one. Don’t ever get all
big-eyed over beautiful work—chances are it was real easy to do. What I
always say is, a Duncan Phyfe is only a piccoloful of whiskey.”

“But—but—”

“Pull this chain, starts it. Rest your chisel here, cut light and slow
at first. Anytime you want to see what you’ve done or feel it, pull the
chain again, it stops. That’s all there is.” He started the machine,
took the chisel, and, under its traveling point, the wood drew on a new
garment of texture from end to end.

Timidly, Smith took back the chisel and nervously approached the
spinning wood. It touched, and he sprang back, but there was a new neat
ring around it. Fascinated, he tried it again, and again, and then
looked up to ask if that was right: but Noat had confidently retired to
the other end of the shop, where a disgraceful-looking glue pot sat upon
a gas ring.

Nothing could have given him more assurance than to be trusted with the
job like this. For a while, then, he entered the magical,
never-quite-to-be-duplicated region of The First Time. You may challenge
the world to find anyone who runs a lathe and who also forgets the first
cut he ever made.

Disappointingly soon, the square wood was round; but then he realized
joyfully that this would be a new spoke for the chair, and must come
down quite a bit more. He worked steadily and carefully, until at last
his mind was able to watch it while it thought of other things as
well—and it thought of Eloise, thought of Eloise in a way unknown to it
for oh … oh, a long time; and for such a brief while, too—there was
something deeply sad about that. The day—no, two days—before he had
stumblingly asked her to marry him, he had been in a drugstore, just
like any other drugstore except for the climactic fact that it was in
her neighborhood, the one she always went to, _her_ drugstore. He had
walked in to get some cough drops and had suddenly realized this
incredible thing about the place—that she had many times stood here, had
bent over that showcase, had had that prim warm little body cupped there
by the padded swivel seats at the soda fountain. She had smiled in this
place. Her voice had vibrated the sliding glass over the vitamins, and
her little feet must have lightly dotted the floor, from time to time,
just after it had been waxed.

And so it was with the Anything Shoppe; her hand had danced the
spring-dangling doorbell, and she had bargained here and made plans, and
counted money and held it for a moment, while the three fine “thinking”
furrows—two long and one short—came between her eyebrows, and went
quickly, leaving no mark. She had smiled in this place, and perhaps
laughed; and here she had thought of him.

Textured wall.

The turning wood had grown silky, and now seemed to be growing a sheath
of mist … he withdrew the tool and stood watching it through the blur
until a bulky rectangular object on the tool rest distracted him. He
blinked, and saw it was a box of tissues. Gratefully he reached for one
and blew his nose and wiped his eyes. He gazed guiltily at Noat, but the
big man’s back was turned and he appeared to be totally absorbed in
stirring his stinking glue. Let’s not think about how he put the tissues
there, or why … turn off the machine now.

George Noat found it not necessary to turn to him until he spoke:
“Getting a cold, I guess … snff … time of year. Mr. Noat, have a look at
this now.”

Noat lumbered back to the lathe and ran his hand along the piece. His
hands were those a prep-school boy might see from the windows of the
school bus, that a collegian with a school letter on the front of his
sweater might see manipulating the mysteries under a car. One seldom
noticed the skill of such hands, but ingrained black was dirt and dirt
was, vaguely, “them,” not “us.” The idea does cling, oh yes it does,
ingrained, too. Yet for all his distress in this moment, Smith was able
to notice how the great grainy leather-brown hand closed all around the
stainless new wood, was intimate with it from end to end, left not a
mark. To Smith it was an illumination, to see such a hand live so with
purity. All this subliminal; still before his stinging eyes was the mist
of hurting, and he said aloud, “She left me.”

“That’s just _fine_,” said George Noat. He must have meant one thing or
the other—probably he meant … for he was taking up the red chair. He
lifted it high and hung it casually on the handle of a scythe, which, in
turn, hung to the beam overhead. An unbroken rung of the chair thereby
lay at his eye level. He started the lathe, and with four sure sweeps
and five confident pauses, he duplicated the unbroken rung complete to
its dowelled ends. He stopped the machine, slapped away collet and
tailstock and tried the new rung for size. Freehand, with a keyhole saw,
he cut away excess at the tips. It fitted. He took it to the glue pot,
dipped the ends, returned and set it in place; then, with simultaneous
blows right and left, he drove it home. A war surplus quartermaster’s
canvas belt plus a suitcase clasp of the over-center type formed a clamp
for it. He left it where it hung, and in his strange way—he seemed never
to move quickly, but all the same, could loom up over a man in a rush—he
rounded on Smith. “You want her back?”

“Oh God,” said Jody Smith softly, “I do.”

“Hmp.” Noat moved to the other end of the counter and gingerly capped
the hot glue pot. “You need her,” Smith thought he said.

Smith frowned. “Isn’t that what I just said?”

“Nope.”

Jody Smith’s quick petulance evaporated as quickly as it had formed;
again he found himself fumbling for whatever it was this creature seemed
to mean, or almost meant. “I said I want her back.”

“I know. You didn’t say you need her.”

“It’s the same thing.”

“No, it ain’t.”

Half angry, half amused, Smith said, “Oh come on, now. Who’d split hairs
about a thing like that?”

“Some people might.” He paused, looking at a piece of junk he pulled
from a box. “Gorwing, he would.”

“Gorwing, he won’t,” said Smith with some asperity. “Look, I don’t want
this talked all over with the likes of that Gorwing.”

Noat gave a peculiar chuckle. “Gorwing wouldn’t talk about it. He’d just
_know_.”

“I don’t get you. He’d just—know? Know what?”

“If you should want something. Or need it.”

Smith wagged his head helplessly. “I never know when you’re kidding.”

“This thing,” said Noat soberly, staring at the object in his hand—it
seemed to be the ring-shaped, calibrated “card” from a marine
compass—“got three hundred and sixty degrees on it. More than any
college graduate in the country.” Without moving anything but his eyes,
he regarded Smith. “Am I kidding?”

In spite of himself, Smith felt moved to laughter. “I don’t know.”
Sobering then, and anxious, “Have you any idea where she might have—”

“I really couldn’t say,” interjected the proprietor. “Here’s Gorwing.”

“Oh, for God’s sake,” Smith muttered.

Gorwing banged in, stopped, stared at Smith. He passed his hand over his
eyes and muttered, “Oh, for God’s sake.”

Then both men turned to Noat, redly regarding his sudden burst of
merriment.

“You settin’ on a feather?” rasped Gorwing.

“Just listening to the echoes,” answered Noat, grinning. Then a quick
concern enveloped his features. He leaned forward and watched Gorwing
bend his head, gingerly touch the back of his neck. “What is it—him?”

_“Him?”_ Gorwing glanced insultingly at Smith. “Him, too, you might say.
You doing anything?”

“What do you want?” asked Noat.

“Let’s take a ride.”

Noat, too, glanced at Smith, but not with insult. “Sure,” he said. “Go
on out to the car. Be with you soon’s I … got something to finish.”

Gorwing glanced inimically at Smith again. “Don’t waste no time, now,”
he said, and slung out.

Smith made a relieved and disgusted sighing sound like _zhe-e-e-e!_ and
shrugged like shuddering. Noat came around the counter and stood close,
as if his proximity could add a special urgency to what he had to say.
“Mister Smith, you want to see your wife again? You want her to come
back?”

“I told you—”

“I believe you, especially now. Some other time we’ll talk about it all
you want. Now if you want to get her back, you go with Gorwing, hear?
You drive him where he wants to go.”

“_Me?_ Not on your life! I want no part of it, and I bet neither does
he.”

“You just tell him, it’s with you or not at all; you tell him I said
so.”

“Look, I think—”

“Please, Mister Smith, don’t think; not now—there isn’t time. Just get
out there.”

“This is the craziest thing I ever heard of.”

“You’re absolutely right.” Noat physically turned Smith around and faced
him to the door. Outside, a horn blared. The sound seemed to loop and
lock lassolike round the confused and upset Smith. He allowed it to pull
him outside. He might then have been frightened if he had been given a
chance to think, but Gorwing roared at him: “Where’s G-Note?”

“You come in my car or not at all,” Smith parrotted, his voice far more
harsh than he had intended. He then marched to his car, got in and
started the motor.

Livid, Gorwing sprang out of the other car. “G-Note!” he bawled at the
unresponsive store front, then cursed and ran to Smith’s car and slammed
inside.

“Whose stupid idea was this?” he snarled.

White and shaken, but, feeling that in some way he had already tipped
over the lip of some long slide, Smith said, “Not mine. You going some
place?”

Gorwing hunched back against the door, as far from Smith as he could
get. “You know the Thruway exit southbound?”

“All right.”

He turned out into the street and right at the main avenue. Once or
twice he glanced at his passenger, the slick black hair, the fevered
dark eyes, the lips ever curled back from the too-sharp, too-white
teeth. It was a tormented, dangerous kind of face, and the posture—this
had been true as he had seen Gorwing stand, walk, turn, sit—was always
one of imminent attack, like some small furious cornered animal.

He knew a short cut just here, and was on it before he quite realized he
had come so far. He swung the wheel abruptly and turned into Midland
Avenue, and from the corner of his eye, seemed to see the feral
silhouette of his passenger sink and disappear. Astonished, he glanced
at Gorwing, to find him bent almost double, his hands clasping the back
of his neck, his eyes screwed shut.

“You feel sick?” He applied the brakes.

Gorwing unlaced the fingers behind his neck and, without opening his
eyes, freed a hand for some violent semaphore. “Just drive,” came his
strained, hissing whisper. Puzzled beyond bearing, Smith drove. Was
Gorwing in pain? Or—could this be it—was he hiding? Who from? There was
a football field and a high school on the left, a row of houses—mostly
nurses’ residences for the nearby hospital—on the right. No one seemed
to be paying special attention to the car.

Two blocks further on Gorwing slowly sat up.

“You all right now?”

In a very, very quiet voice, a deathly, a deadly voice, Gorwing spoke.
He tipped the side of his mouth toward Smith as he spoke, but stared
straight ahead. He said, “Don’t you ever drive me near the hospital. Not
ever.”

Crazy as a coot, thought Smith. “Nobody told me.”

“I’m telling you.”

They came to the underpass and crossed beneath the Thruway, and Gorwing
came out of himself enough to lean forward and scan the road and the
sides of the road, ahead. Suddenly he pointed. “There he is. Pull over
there.”

Smith saw a young man in a grimy flannel suit and a white sport shirt,
standing on the grassy shoulder just by the Thruway exit. There was a
suitcase with a broken clasp on the grass by his feet. Smith pulled off
the pavement and stopped.

The man picked up his suitcase and came toward them, trying to smile.
“Give us a lift into town?”

Gorwing’s tongue darted out to wet his lips, and his eyes seemed to grow
even brighter. He waited until the man was abreast of the car, was even
elevating his suitcase to let it precede him into the back seat, then
sprang out and, chest arched, eyes flaming, blocked the man. “Lift
hell,” he snarled, “this town wouldn’t give a cup o’ water to the likes
of you. Don’t you set foot in it. We don’t wancha.”

The stranger slitted his eyes. “Now wait, Mac, you wait a minute here.
Who the hell you think you are? You own this—”

“Git,” said Gorwing, and his voice descended to something like the
hissing, strained note that Smith had heard in the car. He mouthed his
words—spittle ran suddenly from the corner of his mouth. As he spoke he
walked, and as he walked the other man backed away. “You
gawd … damn … junky … you think you can come here and pick up a fix,
well this place is cold turkey for you and you’d better be on your way
out of it, never mind who I am, I killed a man once.”

The man tried to shout him down, but Gorwing kept talking, kept
crouching forward. “We’re stayin’ right here to see you walk up the pike
or down the pike or hitch a ride, I don’t care which way, an’ don’t
think you c’n slide into town without my knowin’, I got guys spotted all
over town and your life ain’t worth a bar o’ soap if you so much as show
your face let alone tryin’ to find a pusher. There ain’t no pusher an’
if you meet another gawd damn hophead you c’n pass the word—” but it was
pointless to go on; suitcase and all, the man had turned by then and
fled. Gorwing put his thumbs in his belt and watched the hitchhiker,
white-faced, scampering to the northbound lane. Then Gorwing sighed, and
turned tiredly back to the car.

“What a blistering,” breathed the thunderstruck Smith as Gorwing got in
and fell back on the seat. “Who was that?”

“Never saw him before in my life,” said Gorwing absently. With great
tenderness he touched the back of his neck. He looked at Smith by
rolling his fevered eyes, as if the neck were too tender to disturb. “I
never killed a man,” he said. “I just say that to scare ’em.”

A thousand questions pressed on Smith’s tongue, but he swallowed all
but, “You want to go back now?”

“How’s our li’l buddy doing?”

Smith peered down the ramp. Through the underpass, he could see the
grimy-white of the hitchhiker’s clothes. “He’s still—no wait, I think
he’s got a lift.”

Gorwing joined him in peering. They saw a green Dodge slow and stop, and
the man climb in. “And good riddance,” murmured Gorwing.

“I don’t think he’ll be back,” said Smith, for something to say.

“He’ll wish he didn’t if he does,” said Gorwing, so offhandedly that
Smith knew the man, the episode, the whole subject was leaving Gorwing’s
mind; and in a way this was the most extraordinary part of this
inexplicable episode, for Smith knew that he himself would never forget
it. Gorwing said, “Drive.”

Smith made a slightly illegal turn and got the car headed back toward
town. When he saw the yellow and black HOSPITAL ENTRANCE—500 FEET sign,
he turned left and went into a long detour. Gorwing sat abstractedly,
and Smith was certain he had not noticed the special effort he was
making, until they turned back again on to Midland Avenue, well past,
and Gorwing said, “Hospitals, they give me the creeps.”

“Me, too,” said Smith, remembering a tonsillectomy when he was
fourteen—his only contact with the healing arts in all his life. Gorwing
laughed at him—a singularly unpleasant and mirthless laugh. Anything in
Smith that was about to formulate conversation—maybe even a question out
of his vast perplexity—dried up. Smith’s petulant pink underlip
protruded, and he drove without speaking until they pulled up in front
of the Anything Shoppe. Smith had never been so glad to see anything in
his life. He had had, as of now, exactly all he could take of this man.

He swung his door open but “Oh, hell,” Gorwing said. He said it in the
tones of a man who has conducted a theater party in from the suburbs and
finds, under the marquee, that he has forgotten the tickets. In spite of
himself, “What’s the matter?” asked Smith.

“Shut up,” said Gorwing. Suddenly he closed his eyes and said again, “Oh
hell.” Then he opened his eyes and snapped, “Get goin’. Quick.”

Reflexively Smith shut the door, then demanded of himself _why?
_Argumentatively he asked, “Where do you want to go?”

“_Move_, will ya?” He waved vaguely toward Hook Mountain. “Up that way.
I’ll tell you.”

“I don’t see—”

Gorwing’s words tumbled out so fast they were almost indistinguishable.
“Dammit you want somebody should be dead it’s your fault you didn’t jump
when I said jump now _drive!_”

The car was started and heading north before Smith was aware of it, so
stunned was he by this hot spurt of language. When a man speaks like
that, you want to throw your hands up over your face as if you had seen
raging heat through sudden cracks in something you knew, too late, might
explode.

A mile later Smith asked timidly, “What do you mean, dead?”

“Your place,” Gorwing growled, directing, not responding.

They wheeled into the private road and up the hill. _Dead? My place?_
Smith was terrified. “Listen—”

“You got any rope?” Gorwing snapped.

“Rope?” Smith repeated stupidly. He went into his own driveway in a
power-slide; he hadn’t known he could drive like that. “No, I haven’t
got any rope. What—”

“Oh, you wouldn’t,” spat Gorwing. “Chains. You got tire chains?”

“I don’t—yes. In the trunk.” He braked to a slithering stop in the
turnaround. Gorwing was out of the car while it was still sliding, and
tugging at the trunk lid. He roared to find it locked. Smith tumbled out
with the keys and opened it. Gorwing flung him aside in his dive as he
clawed through the trunk, throwing tire iron, jack pedestal, a can of
hydraulic fluid behind him like a digging dog. The chains were in a
cloth sack; he up-dumped the sack, shook out the chains, hooked the end
of one into the end of the other, draped them over his shoulder and
sprinted down toward the house.

“Wait, you—” gasped Smith, and trotted after him.

Gorwing passed the house and plunged across the lower lawn into the
woods, Smith after him, already panting. “Hey, watch yourself, that’s
full of poison ivy back there!”

Gorwing was already out of sight in the rank woods below the house.

Stumbling, gasping, Smith floundered after him, until he came to the
edge of the cliff that overlooked the broad Hudson. At this point it was
sheer about a hundred feet, then slanted down and away in a mass of
weed-grown rubble almost to the railroad tracks. For a moment he thought
Gorwing must have plunged straight over the edge, but then he saw him
working his way along the ragged brink to the right.

“Hang on! Hang on!” Gorwing yelled. Totally perplexed, Smith looked
around him for whatever it was he was supposed to hang on to and failed
to find it. He shrugged and stumbled after the man. Gorwing kept
bellowing to hang on. Suddenly Smith saw him fall to his knees and crawl
to the crumbling lip of the precipice. He yelled again, then moved on a
couple of feet and hooked a free end of the tire chains to itself around
the trunk of a foolhardy pine tree with a ten-inch bole, which grew
bravely at the lip of disaster.

At last, Smith reached Gorwing, who had hunkered down with his back to
the tree. He had described the man to himself before as “fevered”—he now
looked sick as well; there was a difference. “What are you—”

Gorwing motioned toward the drop. “You’ll have to do it. I can’t stand
high places.”

“Do what?”

Gorwing pointed again. Smith heard a weak bleating sound that seemed to
come from everywhere. But it was specifically outward that Gorwing had
pointed. So he fell to his knees and crawled to the edge and looked
over.

Eight or ten feet below him he saw the chalk-white, tear-streaked face
of a thirteen- or fourteen-year-old boy. The child was hanging by his
hands to a protruding root, which angled so sharply downward that it was
clear no grip could last too long on it. The boy’s toes were dug into
loose earth, a fresh damp scar of which surrounded his feet and,
widening, showed where to his left a ledge had fallen away. To his right
was rock, almost sheer, and without a handhold.

_“Hang on!”_ yelled Smith, at least half again as loud and urgently as
Gorwing had. He caught up the end of the chain and lowered it carefully
down. At its fullest extent it reached about to the boy’s belt-line.
Smith looked at Gorwing, who looked back out of sick black eyes. “You
got to,” he said in strained tones, “I tell you I can’t. I just can’t.”

Smith, whose usual activities involved nothing more strenuous than stamp
tongs, found himself on his stomach, hanging his legs over, hunting
wildly with his toes for the rungs formed by the crosslinks of the tire
chain. Then he was stepping down, while the earth and grass of the edge
rose up and obscured Gorwing like some crazy inverted theater curtain.
“Hang on,” he said, and was startled when the boy answered, “Okay …”
because that remark had been for himself.

Tire chains may be roughly the size and shape of a small ladder, but
they take unkindly to it. The rungs roll and their parts pinch, and the
whole thing swings and bends alarmingly; _you_ know they won’t break,
but do _they?_ Too soon the next rung under his seeking foot
just—wasn’t, and he withdrew the foot from nothing-at-all and stood on
the last crosslink, gulping air. He was then of a mind to freeze to his
shaky perch and stay there until somebody else figured a way out, but
there came a whimper nearby and he saw clods and stones spin sickeningly
down and away from the boy’s toes. He glanced at the boy’s face, saw and
would forever see the muddy pallor, the fear-bulged eye, the lips gone
whiter than the tanned cheeks. The youngster’s foothold was gone, and
only his grip on the slanted root held him. Afterward, Smith was to
reflect that, if the kid had been standing on anything solid, he would
never in life have been able to figure out a way to bring him in; but
now he _had_ to, so he did.

“Lift your foot!” he screamed. “Give me your foot!”

The foot was already dangling, but for an endless, mindless moment the
boy stretched downward with it, trying to make a toehold if he could not
find one; then Smith screamed again, and the boy brought the foot up
slowly, shakily … and he said, “My hands, I can’t …” but then Smith had
the foot, leaning far sidewise to get it; he lifted it, thrust it
through the last “rung” down to the knee. One more reach, and he had the
skinny upper arm in a grip that astonished both of them. “Let go,” he
panted, and the boy let go; it may well be that he could not have held
on any longer to the root if he had wanted to. With the release, the
chains swung nauseatingly sidewise; with one hand Smith ground steel
into his own flesh, with the other drove flesh into the arm-bone; but he
had the boy, now, thrust the arm through the next rung. “Hold with your
arms, not your hands,” he said through his teeth.

When they stopped swinging, Smith freed his hand from the boy’s biceps.
It took a concentrated effort, so clamped, so cramped, was his
hysterical hand. “Now rest,” he said to both, for both of them. The boy
kept whimpering, a past-tears meaningless, habitual kind of sound, dry
and probably unfelt. Some measureless time later he helped the boy get
his other leg into the little twisted square of chain, so that he sat
and whimpered, while Smith stood and panted, for however long it took to
be able to think again. Then Smith had the boy stand up inside the
circle of his arms, and climb until his buttocks were at the level of
Smith’s chest. Then they climbed together, Smith urging the boy to sit
back on him when he had to, half-lifting him when they got the strength
and the courage, each interminable time, to try another rung. And when
at last the boy tumbled up and over and was, by Gorwing, snatched back
from the edge, Smith had to stop achingly and wearily ponder out what
had happened to the weight and presence of him, before he could go on.

Gorwing snatched him, too, away from the edge, where he lay laughing
weakly.

“You,” said Gorwing darkly, “you real gutsy.”

_“Me?”_

“I coudn’. Not ever, I could never do that.” He made a sudden vague
gesture, startling in its aimlessness, a jolting contrast to his vulpine
appearance and harsh voice. “I never had much guts.”

Smith held his peace, as does one in the presence of evidence too great
for immediate speculation. He thought of Gorwing standing up to him
about the hundred-dollar fare, and of Gorwing ravening, tearing, lashing
out at the hitchhiking dope addict. Yet there was no mistaking his
sincerity in what he said—nor in this frank compliment to him, Smith—a
man who had, up until now, stimulated only open disgust. He promised
himself he would think about it later. He said to the boy, “How do you
feel, kid?”

“Gee, all right.” The boy shuddered. “Ain’t going to do that again.”

“What were you doing?”

“Aw. Bunch of Nyack kids, they bet nobody could climb the cliff. I
didn’t say nothing, but I thought I could, so I tried it.”

Smith stood up, held gingerly to the tree trunk and peered over. “Where
are they?”

“Oh gosh, I wouldn’t try it when anyone’s around. I just wanted to see
if I could before I opened my trap about it.”

“So no one knew you were there!”

The boy grinned shakily. “You did.”

Gorwing and Smith shared a glance; to Smith it meant nothing, but
Gorwing rose abruptly and barked, “Let’s get out of here.” Smith sensed
his sudden desire to change the subject, just as he sensed the impact of
the boy’s refusal to change the subject: “Hey, how _did_ you know I was
there?”

Gorwing half turned; Smith thought he sensed that glance again, but when
he tried to meet it it was gone. “Heard you yellin’,” Gorwing said
gruffly.

“I live right here,” said Smith. It satisfied the boy completely, but
for the very first time Smith saw Gorwing look astonished. Yes, and in a
way pleased.

They stopped at his house for something cool to drink, and then got in
the car to return to Nyack; the boy said he lived on Castle Heights
Avenue. There was surprisingly little talk. Neither Gorwing nor Smith
seemed to know how to talk to a thirteen-year-old—a rare talent, at
best, rare even among thirteen-year-olds—yet what occupied Smith’s mind
could hardly be discussed in his presence.

Gorwing. This rough, mad, strange, unpredictable Gorwing … you couldn’t
like him; and Smith knew he did not. Yet through him, with him, Smith
had shared something new—new, yes, and rich. He had … it was as if he
had had a friend for a moment there, working so dangerously
together … and the work was for someone else; that had something to do
with it …

Friend … Smith knew many people, and he had no enemies, and so he had
thought he had had friends; but for a moment now he got a glimpse of the
uncomfortable fact that he had no friends. Never had. Even … even
Eloise. Husband and wife they were, lovers they had been—hadn’t
they?—but could he honestly say that he and Eloise had ever been
friends?

He sank for a moment into a viscous caldron of scalding loneliness.
_Eloise_ …

“Hey.” Gorwing’s harsh note crashed into his reverie. “How we get this
young feller to keep his mouth shut?”

“Me?” said the boy.

“You better keep your mouth shut, that’s all,” said Gorwing ominously.

Smith had no experience in talking to boys, but he could see this was
the wrong tack. The kid was edging away from Gorwing, and his eyes were
too wide. Smith said quickly, “He’s right. I don’t know your mother,
sonny, but I’d say she’d be worried sick if you told her the story. Or
maybe just mad.”

“Yeah, maybe.” He looked warmly at Smith, then timidly at Gorwing.
“Yeah, I guess you’re right.… Can’t I tell _nobody?_”

“I’d as soon you didn’t.”

“Well, anything you say,” said the boy. He swallowed and said again,
“Anything …” and then, “That’s my house. The white one.”

Smith stopped well away from the house. “Hop out, so no one sees you in
the car. So long.”

“So long.” The boy walked away a slow pace, then turned back. “I don’t
even know your names.”

“Delehanty,” said Smith. And Gorwing said solemnly, “Me, too.”

“Well,” said the boy uneasily, “well, thanks, then,” and moved toward
the white house.

Smith backed into a nearby driveway and headed back toward the shop.

Gorwing said truculently, “How come you covered for me like that?”

“I had the idea you wanted it that way. Up on the cliff I got that
idea.”

“Yeah.… You know all the time what people want?”

“I don’t think,” said Smith slowly, with a frankness that stung his
eyes, “I ever tried before.”

They rolled along for what seemed a long, companionable moment. Then
Smith added, “You don’t always help people out for money, do you?”

Gorwing shrugged, rolled down his window, and spat. “Only when I can get
it. Oh man, could I use some about now.”

“This,” said Smith bitterly, “is my taxicab this time.”

“Oh, I wasn’t asking you for nothing. You watch yourself, Smith. I’m no
panhandler.”

Smith drove self-consciously, carefully. He knew his face was pink, and
he hated himself for it. He wondered if he could say anything to this
madman without making him angry. Angrier. He asked, without malice,
“What would you do with money?”

“Get drunk,” said Gorwing, and immediately glanced at Smith’s face. “Oh
my God,” he said disgustedly, “he believes me. I never drink
anything … What would I do with money?” he mused. “ ’Pends how much. Now
there’s a couple, the old man is dying. I mean, he can’t last, not much
more. The woman, she stays by him ever minute, don’t go out even to buy
food. Somebody don’t go to the store for ’em, throw ’em a couple skins
now and then, they … oh, you wouldn’t know.”

No, Smith wouldn’t know. He had never been in need … or in danger,
before today. Turning into Midland Avenue, he glanced down a side street
toward the river, where the wide-lawned pleasant houses gave way to the
shabby-decent, the tenement, the shack. He had never done that before,
not to _see_ them. And then, the need you could see, starting with the
shacks, was, when you came to think about it, surely not all the need
there was; need comes in so many colors and kinds. He brought the
thought back up to the crisp-tended, tree-shaded homes on the Avenue and
wondered what it was like to live in this world instead of—of whatever
it was he had been doing.

He stopped in front of the Anything Shoppe, and they got out. “Here,”
Smith said. He took out his wallet and found a twenty-dollar bill. He
looked at Gorwing and suddenly took out the ten, too—all he had with
him.

Gorwing did not thank him. He took the money and said, “Well, all
right!” and marched off.

Smith was still wagging his head as he entered the shop.

“I know how you feel,” said G-Note, grinning.

“What is he?”

G-Note grunted. “I never did really know, myself.”

“I never thought I’d say this, but I sort of like him.” Smith was
feeling very warm inside about all this.

Oddly enough, the remark brought no smile this time. “I don’t know if
you can really _like_ Gorwing,” said Noat thoughtfully. “He
sometimes … but anyway, tell me what happened.”

Smith related his afternoon. Noat nodded sagely. “Junkies,” he nodded at
one point. “He can’t stand ’em. Runs ’em out of town every time.”

At the end of his story, Smith told him about the money. “Is that on the
level, Mr. Noat? Or will he just go on a toot?”

“No, it’s on the level. If he keeps out any for himself, it’ll be what
he barely needs.”

“Doesn’t he have a job or something?”

Noat shook his big head. “No job. No home, not what you might call a
place of his own. Moves around all the time, furnished rooms, back of
the poolhall, here in the shop sometimes. I don’t think he ever leaves
town, though.”

“Mr. Noat, how does he do it?”

Noat cocked his head on one side. “Didn’t you ask him?”

Smith laughed weakly. “No.” Then, with a sudden surge of candor, “Tell
you the truth, I was afraid to.”

“Tell you the truth, I’m afraid to, too,” said Noat. “He … well, between
you and me, I think he thinks he’s some sort of freak. Or, anyway, he’s
afraid people will think that. He never lets anybody get close to him.
He always does what he can to hide how he does what he does. Usually by
blowing up in your face.”

“He must … he seems to do a lot of good.”

“Yes …” There was a reservation in the ugly man’s voice.

“Well, doggone it, what _is_ it he does?”

“He, well, hears when somebody needs something, or maybe you might say
smells it. I don’t know. I don’t know as I care much, except it works.
Heck, you don’t have to know how everything works—by the time you did,
you’d be too old to work it.” He turned away, and Smith thought for a
moment he had closed the subject, but he said, without turning around,
“Only thing I’m sure of, he knows the difference between wanting
something and needing it.”

“Want … you asked me that!”

“I did. I asked Gorwing, too, although maybe you don’t remember.”

“Eloise … you mean he’d know whether I—need her, or just want her? Him?”

Noat chuckled. “Feels like a sort of invasion of privacy, doesn’t it? It
is and it isn’t … what he knows, however he knows it, it isn’t like
anyone else knowing it. That Gorwing … but he does a lot of good, you
know.”

“I don’t doubt it.”

“Calla Pincus, she thinks he’s some sort of saint.”

“Who’s she?”

“Girl he—well, she was going to kill herself one time, and he stopped
her. She’d do anything for him. So would the Blinker—he’s kind of a
poolhall rat—and there’s old Sarge, that’s a track walker for the West
Side Line … I mean, he has sort of a raggle-taggle army, all through the
town, that’ve learned to ask no questions and jump to do what he says.
Sometimes for pay. And Doc Tramble, and one of the teachers at the high
school and … and me, I guess—”

“And me.”

Noat laughed. “So welcome to the fold.”

“All these years in this town,” Smith marveled, “and I never guessed
this was going on. Mr. Noat … does he know where my wife is?”

“Did you ask him?”

Smith shook his head. “Somehow I … I was afraid to ask him that, too.”

“You better. You need her—you know that and I do and he does. I think
you should ask him … Now can I ask you something?”

“Oh, sure.”

“You never went to the police or anything. How come?”

Smith looked down at his hands and closed them, then his eyes. He said
in a low voice, “I guess because … You know, she said to me, whatever
had happened, she still wanted me to be happy. I imagine I wanted the
same thing for her. It was something she had to do; I didn’t think I
should stop her.”

“But you’re looking now.”

“Not with police.”

“Hey, he’s coming. Ask him. Go ahead—ask him.”

Smith turned eagerly to the door as Gorwing banged in. “Hi!” He felt
warm, friendly—pleasurably scared—anticipatory. Gorwing utterly ignored
him.

Noat frowned briefly and said, “Hey boy. Smitty there, he’s got
something to ask you.”

“He has?” Gorwing did not even look around.

Smith hesitated, then caught Noat’s encouraging nod.

Timidly, he asked, “Mr. Gorwing … do you know where my wife is?”

Gorwing flicked him with a black glance and showed his white teeth.
“Sure.” Then he turned his full cruel smile on Smith and said, “She
don’t need you.”

Smith blinked as if something had flashed before his eyes. His mouth was
dry inside, and outside shivery. He wanted to say something but could
not.

Noat growled, “That ain’t what he asked you, Gorwing. He says do you
know where she is.”

“Oh sure,” said Gorwing easily, and grinned again. “She got a cold-water
walk-up over on High Avenue, ’long with the guy she’s livin’ with.”

Smith had never in his life physically attacked anyone, but now he
grunted, just as if he had been kicked in the stomach, and rushed
Gorwing. He struck out, a wild, round, unpracticed blow, but loaded with
hysteria and hate. It never reached Gorwing, but planted itself instead
in the region of Noat’s left shoulder blade, for Noat, moving with
unbelievable speed for so large a man, had vaulted the counter and come
between them. He came, obviously, not to protect anyone, but to launch
his own attack. “You lousy little rat, you didn’t have to do that. Now
you get out of here,” he rumbled, as with one hand he opened the door
and with the other literally threw Gorwing outside. Gorwing tried to
keep his balance but could not; he fell heavily, rolled, got up. His
face was so white his black hair looked almost blue; still he grinned.
Then he was gone.

Noat closed the door and came to Smith. “So now you know.”

“El-Eloise is …” and he began to cough.

“Oh, not that! I mean, now you know about Gorwing. How can you figure
it? All he does is take care of what people need … and there’s no
kindness in him.”

“Eloise is—”

“Your wife is taking care of an old sick man who’ll be dead any time
now.”

“Who?” Smith cried, agonized. “_What_ old man?”

“That you just gave the money for.”

“I’ve got to find her,” whispered Smith, and then heard what Noat had
said. “You mean_—that_ old man? Wh-why, he told me it was an old
_couple!_”

“I bet he didn’t.”

“You! _You_ know where she is! You knew all the time.”

Noat spread his hands unhappily. “You never asked me.”

Smith’s scorn made him appear a sudden four inches taller. “Quit playing
games!”

“Okay … okay.” The big man looked completely miserable. “I just didn’t
want to hurt you, that’s all.” At Smith’s sharp look, he said “Honest.
Honest … Gorwing, he’s right, you know. She doesn’t need you. I wish you
didn’t make me tell you that. I’m sorry.” He went back behind the
counter, as if he could comfort himself with the tools, the clutter back
there.

“You better tell me the whole thing,” whispered Smith.

“Well … she, Mrs. Smith I mean, she came to me that day. She was
all … mixed up. I don’t think she meant to spill anything, but she sort
of … couldn’t hold it.” He put up a swift hand when Smith would have
interrupted. “Wait, I’m telling this all wrong. What I’m trying to say,
she came here because she just didn’t know where else to go to. She said
something about ‘Anything Shoppe’; she wanted to know if ‘anything’
meant … _anything_. She said she had to have a job, something to do. She
said never mind the money, just enough to scrape along, but something to
_do;_ that’s what she needed.”

“What she needed.”

“I know what you’re thinking. Yeah, Gorwing knew she needed something,
and just what it was, too … y’see,” he said earnestly, “he’s always
right. Even the lousy things he does sometimes, they’re always right. Or
at least … there’s always a reason.” He stopped, as if to ponder it out
for himself.

“Look,” said Smith, suddenly, painfully kneading his cheeks, “whatever
it is you have to tell me, tell me. I’m all mixed up … and … and _where
is she?_” Then he opened his blue eyes very wide—oddly like those of the
boy he had saved on the cliff, when Gorwing had frightened him—and said
piteously, “You mean she really doesn’t need me? Gorwing was right?”

G-Note crouched over, elbows on the counter, his big hands holding each
other in front of him.

He said, “What she needed, what she needed more than anything in the
world, she needed something to take care of. You—well, she tried to take
care of you, but—Don’t you see what I mean?”

There was silence for a long time. Smith felt that somehow, if he could
pull together the churned-up pieces of his mind, he might be able to
turn it to this, make some sense out of it. He tried very hard, and at
last was able to say, “You mean, when you come right down to it,
there … was never very much for her to do for me.”

“Oh, you got it. You got it. You … well, she told me some things. She
cried, I guess she didn’t mean to say anything, but I guess—she just had
to. She said you could cook better’n she could.”

“What?”

“Well, things you liked to eat, you could. And those were all the things
you ever wanted. She took care of the house, but you’d ’a done just the
same things if she wasn’t there. She never felt she really _had_ to …”

“But this old man—who’s _he?_”

“One of Gorwing’s … you know. Gorwing found him down by the tracks.
Sick, wore out. Needing somebody to take care of him—_needing_ it, you
see? Not for long … Doc Tramble, he says he don’t know how the old
fellow hung on this long.”

“God,” said Smith, stinging with chagrin, “is that what she needed?
Maybe I should be dying—she’d be happy with me then.”

“Ah, knock that off. She’s only like most people, she has to make a
difference to somebody. She makes a difference to that old man, and she
knows it.”

“She made a difference to me,” whispered Smith, and then something lit
up inside him. He stared at Noat. “But she never knew it.” Suddenly he
leaped to his feet, walked up, walked back, sat again bolt upright,
holding himself as if he were full of coiled springs. “What’s the matter
with me? You know what I did, I said she had somebody with her while I
was at the Elks’ that night, you know, the night you picked me up in the
car. That’s why she left.” He hit himself on the forehead with sharp
knuckles. “I know she didn’t have anyone, she wouldn’t! So what made me
think of it? why all of a sudden did I have to think of it, and even
when I knew I was wrong, why did I have to go for her, curse at her,
call her names the way I did, till she had to leave … why?” he shouted.

“You really want me to tell you?” Then Noat looked away from Smith’s
frantic, twisted face and shook his head. “I don’t _know_,” he said
carefully, “I only know what I think. I don’t know everything … I don’t
know you very much. All right?”

“Yes, I understand that. Go ahead.”

“Well, then.” Noat watched his big brown hands press and slide on the
counter until they squeaked, as if they had ideas under them and could
express the words by squeezing. He raised them and looked under them and
folded them and looked at Smith. “You hear a lot of glop,” he said
carefully, “about infantile this and adult that, and acting like a
grownup. I’ve thought a lot about that. Like how you’ve got to be adult
about this or that arrangement with people or the world or your work or
something. Like they’d say you never had an adult relationship with the
missus. Don’t get mad! I don’t mean—well, hell, how adult is two
rabbits? I don’t mean the sex thing.” He opened his hands to look for
more words, and folded them again. “Most people got the wrong idea about
this ‘adult’ business, this ‘grownup’ thing they talk about but don’t
think about. What I’m trying to say, if a thing is alive, it changes all
the time. Every single second it changes; it grows or rots or gets
bigger or grows hair in its armpits or puts out buds or sheds its skin
or something, but when a thing is living, it changes.” He looked at
Smith, and Smith nodded. He went on:

“What I think about you, I think somewhere along the line you forgot
about that, that you had to go on changing. Like when you’re little, you
keep getting bigger all the time, you get promoted in school; you
change; good. But then you get out, you find your spot, you got your
house, your wife, your kind of work, then there’s nothing around you any
more says you have to change. No class to get promoted to. No pants
grown too small. You think you can stop now, not change any more.” Noat
shook his craggy head. “Nothing alive will stand for that, Smitty.”

“Well, but why did I think she … why did I say that about—some man with
her, all that?”

Noat shrugged. “I don’t know all about you,” he said again. “Just sort
of guessing, but suppose you’d stopped, you know, _living_. Something’s
going to kick up about that. It don’t have to make a lot of sense; just
kick up. Get mad about something. Your wife with some man—now, that’s
not nice, that’s not even true, but it’s a _living_ kind of thing, you
see what I mean? I mean, things change around the house then—but good;
altogether; right _now_.”

“My God,” Smith breathed.

“ ’Course,” said Noat, “sooner or later you have to get over it, face
things as they really are. Or as they really ain’t.” He thought again
for a time, then said, “Take a tree, starts from a seed, gets to be a
stalk, a sapling, on up till it’s a hundred feet tall and nine feet
through the trunk; it’s still growing and changing until one fine day it
gets its growth; it’s grown up: it’s—dead. So the whole thing I’m saying
is, this adult relationship stuff they talk about, it’s not that at all.
It’s _growing_ up that matters, not _grown_up.… Man can get along alone
for quite a long time ‘grownup’—taking care of himself. But if he takes
in anyone else, he’s … well, he’s got to have a piece missing that the
other person supplies all the time. He’s got to need that, and he’s got
to have something that’s missing in the other person that they need. So
then the two of them, they’re one thing now … and still it’s got to be
like a living thing, it’s got to change and grow and be alive. Nothing
alive will stand for being stopped. So … excuse me for butting in, but
you thought you could stop it and it blew up on you.”

Smith stared silently at the big man, then nodded. “I see. But now
what?”

“You want to know where she is?”

“Sure. By the Lord, now I can …”

“What’s the matter?”

Smith looked at him, stricken. “Gorwing said … she didn’t need me.”

“Gorwing!” snarled Noat. Then he scratched his head. “I see what he
meant. She never could take care of you much, and she awful much needs
to take care of somebody. Now she’s got the old feller. He needs her,
God knows. For a little while yet … Gorwing … hey! Why d’ye suppose he
tried to make you think—you know—about your wife?”

“You know him better than I do.”

“It comes to me,” said Noat, inwardly amazed. “I see it. I see it. He
makes it his business to take care of what people really need, need real
bad. Right? Good. How do you do that?”

“Get ’em what they need, I guess.”

“That’s one way. Two—” he held up fingers—“you get ’em out of range.
Like he does with dope addicts. Right? Then—three. You fix it so they
just don’t feel they need it any more. I mean, if he was to fix it that
you got so mad at your wife you wouldn’t want ever to see her
again—see?”

“That poor little man! He couldn’t do that.”

“He just tried. He has a gift, Smitty, but that don’t mean he’s bright.”

“It doesn’t?” said Smith in tones of revelation. “It’s bright enough. I
need her—that’s one big need, correct? Now, suppose I go find her, take
her away from that poor old man. He starts needing her—and she starts
needing to take care of somebody again. So—two big needs. That Gorwing,
he knows what he’s doing. I—I can’t do that, Mr. Noat.”

“You mean, to the old man?”

“Well, yes, that. But her … my wife. I need her. You know that, and I
do.”

“And Gorwing does.”

“Yeah, but she doesn’t. God, what do I have to do? Do I really have to
be dying?”

“Living,” said George Noat.

_You’re a freak_.

Sometimes for days at a time he could content himself with the thought
that all the rest of them were freaks. Or that, after all, what does
anyone do? When it gets cold, they try to get warm. When they get
hungry, they go find something to eat. What people feel, whatever’s
crowding them, they get out from under the best way they can, right?
They duck it or move it or blast it out of the way, or use it on
something else that might be bothering them, right? And what bothers
people is different, one from the other. Hunger can get to them all and
cold and things like that; but look, one wants some music, some special
kind of music, more than anything else in life, more than a woman or a
drink, while another needs heroin and another to have a roomful of
people clapping their hands at him. Or needing, needing like
life-and-death, some stupid little thing that would mean nothing to
anyone else—something as little as a couple of words, like that Calla
girl, about to jump off the Tappan Zee Bridge for wanting somebody to
come up to her and say, “Hey, I need you to do something nobody else can
do.” Or needing to feel safe from some something that lurks inside them,
like the Blinker: you’d never guess it to watch him cuss and laugh and
make the pass, and chalk the cue, just like anybody, but he was
epileptic and he never knew when it was going to hit him. Or needing
defense against things lurking outside of them, like Miss Guelph at the
high school, crazy afraid of feathers, terrified one might touch her. So
the things people need and the things they need to be safe from, they’re
all kinds of things: it doesn’t make one of them a freak if his special
need is a little different.

What if you never heard of anyone with a need just like yours? Does that
automatically make you a freak? … There are lots of people who have to
make it alone, who can’t share what they have with anyone. Who can’t
drive a car for fear that faint-making, aching cloud will suck them down
into it when they don’t expect it.

Sometimes, too, you can get to believe that the very thing that’s wrong
with you makes you special. Well, it does, too. You have power over
people. Now just how many people in this—or any—town could tell you a
little kid two blocks away was lost, and a woman three blocks the other
way was looking for him? Or look at the way you found that boy on the
cliff—now that boy would be dead right now.

So if you’re so special how come old Noat throws you out on your ear?

_You’re a freak_.

Now cut it out. You got it made. You got a nice spot. The town’s just
big enough so nobody much notices you, just small enough so when that
faintness comes, and that ache, and then the picture in your head—of a
traffic light or a building front or a green fence or a cliffside—you
know just where to go to find the person who has that big noisy need for
something. Remember that trip down to Fort Lee? So big, so noisy; God,
you almost went out of your head. Plank you down in the middle of New
York, say, you’d be dead in a second, all that racket. And the things
they need, you’d never know where to get them in a big place, but here,
heck, you know where to find anything if it’s in town. Or old Noat will
get it for you.

What he want to throw you out like that for? Just trying to shut off the
shrieking lonesomeness of that squirt Smith; him and his Eloise, it gave
him a headache.

Ow. Here comes one now. Shut your eyes. Ow, my neck. Shut your eyes
tight, now. See … see a … see a street, store-front, green eaves over
the window. Felt carpet slippers, a man’s belt. That would be Harry
Schein’s Haberdashery on Washington Street. Somebody standing there,
needs—what? Sleep, wants to sleep, for God’s sake, gets wide awake soon
as hits the sack … a man. Screaming for sleep, frantic for sleep. Get
some sleeping pills, everything closed now. Hey, this could be worth a
buck. Go call Doc Tramble. Here, phone in the gas station. NY
7 … 0 … 0 … 5 …

“Doc? Gorwing here. Got some sleeping pills in your bag? Oh, nothing
serious … yes, I know what’s dangerous and what ain’t. No, not for me.
Oh, five, I guess. I’ll send the Blinker or somebody around for ’em,
okay?”

Ow. Guy walking toward Broad Street now. Oh boy does he want some sleep.
Where’s dime … here. Call poolroom … 4 … 7 … “Hi—Danny? Gorwing. Hey,
the Blinker there? Hell … Who else is around? No … Nuh, not her. Smith?
What Smith—you mean that guy’s been hanging around G-Note’s? Yeah, put
him on.”

“Hello—Smitty? Thought you’d be mad. You wouldn’t want to do a little
job … you would? Well you’ll have to scramble. Get over to Doc Tramble’s
and say you want the pills for me. Yeah. Then take ’em over to Fordson
Alley and North Broad—you know, right by the movie—there’s a guy there
frantic for ’em. See if you can get a dollar apiece. Sleeping tablets.
Yeah. Hurry now … He’s moving, he’s ambling up past the movie. I don’t
know what he looks like. Just look for a guy looks like he needs some
sleep. Hurry now. See ya.”

Now that’s a surprise. I thought I’d botched it up with that Smith but
for good. A good boy. Calmed down, too. Wonder if he’s going to pull
that wife of his away from the old man. Hope not. Set up a hell of a
rattle, the two of ’em at once.

So Gorwing ambled through the evening, through the town. He walked in a
cloud of, or in a murmur of, or under the pressure of, or through the
resistance of the not-mist, not-sound, not-weight, not-fluid presence of
human need. Want was there, too, but want of that kind—two teen-agers
yearning for a front-drive imported car in a show window, a drowsy child
remembering a huge bride-doll in Woolworth’s, the susurrus of desire
that whispered up in the wake of a white-clad blonde who, with her
boy-friend, walked through the lights of the theater marquee—this kind
of want was simply there to be noticed if he cared to notice it. But the
need … he watched for it fearfully, yet eagerly—for sometimes it paid
off. He hoped that for a while nobody would get hit by a car without
getting killed outright, or that some hophead wouldn’t suddenly appear
with that rasping, edgy scream of demand. Ow. Wish Smitty would get to
that guy with the sleeping pills.

Need was a noise to Gorwing. No, not really a noise. Need was an acid
cloud, a swirling blindness. Need might mount up out of the nighttime
village and make him faint. Need might pay off. Need, other people’s
need, hurt Gorwing … but then each person had one or another difference,
one or another talent; this one bad perfect pitch and that one had
diabetes, and he wasn’t, after all, so different from other people.

_You’re a freak_.

Strangely, it was not too easy to be funereal at this funeral. The
flowers were sad, of course, such a scrappy little bunch, and the man
was saying all the right things … and it was sad how easily the men
handled the coffin; poor little old man, so wasted away. But you
couldn’t feel badly about him now; he’d been glad to go, and it was good
that he’d had, for those last weeks, just what he’d yearned for for so
many sick lonesome years—someone who sat near and brought him things and
listened to him ramble on about all the old places and the friends and
family who were passed on, dead and gone and yet waiting eagerly for
him, some place. No, it wasn’t any tragedy. Sweetly sad, that was
it … and oh, such a bright beautiful day!

Eloise Smith hadn’t been out in the fresh air, the sunshine,
since … “Eeek!”

It was a small scream, or rather squeak, and really no one noticed. But
Jody, oh Jody was standing right next to her in a dark suit, with his
hat—the one they called his Other hat—held over his heart, his head
bowed. He looked … peaceful.

She bowed her head, too, and they stood quite close together until the
man finished saying the old simple words, and the handful of earth went
_tsk!_—a polite expression of sympathy—on the coffin lid. Then it was
over. _“Bye, you old dear,”_ she said silently but with her heart full.

Then there was Jody. “Oh, Jody. I don’t think I—”

“Shh. Eloise, come home. I need you.”

“Jody, you’re going to make me sound mean, and I don’t want to be mean.
But you don’t need me or anybody, Jody.”

Smith moistened his lips, but loosened no special, just-right winning
words; he said, could say, only: “I need you. Come home.”

“Wait—there’s Mr. Gorwing … Wait, Jody; I have to speak to him. Will you
wait over there, Jody? Please?”

“Let me stay with you.”

“Honey,” she said, the wifely word slipping out before she realized it,
“he’s sometimes sort of … funny. Unpredictable. I wish you’d wait over
there and let me talk to—”

“He won’t mind. We’re old friends.”

“You know Mr. Gorwing?”

“Sure.”

“Oh dear. I didn’t know. He … he’s a kind of saint, you know.”

When Smith, coolly regarding Gorwing, who was talking to the funeral
director, did not answer, she went on nervously—she had to talk, _had_
to, oh _why_ had he turned up like this, all unexpectedly? “If anyone’s
in need at all, he has a way of finding it out; he—”

“I’m in need,” said Smith. “I need you.”

“Jody, _don’t_.”

“I do, he said softly, earnestly. “You’ve got to come back. I can’t
manage without you.”

“Oh, that’s silly! You have your—”

“I have my nothing, Ellie. I—I gave the money away, almost all of it. I
got a job, but I’m only beginning, and the pay isn’t much. I’m running a
wood lathe in the cabinetmaker’s.”

“You_—what?_”

“You’ve got to help; maybe you’ll even have to go to work. Would you, if
there’s no other way? I can’t make it without you, Ellie.”

What she was going to say through those soft trembling lips he would not
know, for Gorwing interrupted. “Miz Smith—you know who he is?”

She flashed a look at her husband and really blushed. Gorwing laughed
that wolf’s laugh, that barking expression of mirth and hurt, and said,
“I’ll tell you who he is. He’s the only person in the whole world who
ever came up to me and asked _me_ what _I_ needed.” He clapped Smith on
the shoulder, waved a casual hand at Eloise and walked away toward the
cemetery gate. She called him once; he waved his hand but did not turn
his face toward them.

“We’ll see him again,” said Smith. “Ellie … will you just let me tell
you what this is all about?”

“What _is_ it all about?”

“Can I tell you all of it?”

“Oh, very well …”

“It’ll take about twenty-three years. Oh Eloise—come home.”

“Oh, Jody …”

The shy man crouched in the hospital stairwell and peered through the
crack of the barely-opened door. There were no white-coated figures in
the corridor that he could see. He had long ago abandoned the front way,
the elevator and all. Slipping in through the fire doors during visiting
hours was much better. He pushed the door open far enough to let him
into the corridor, and let it swing silently closed.

He gasped.

“Hello, Johnny.”

Right behind the door as he opened it, oh God, the doctor. Johnny bit
his tongue and stared up into Doc Tramble’s face. It blurred.

“Hey now, hold on,” said the doctor. “You better come in here and sit
down.” He took Johnny’s forearm—and for a split second they were both
acutely aware of Johnny’s tearing temptation to snatch it away and run;
and of its crushed quelling—and led him across the corridor into an
empty private room, where he lowered the sweating visitor into an easy
chair. Dr. Tramble pulled up a straight chair and sat close enough to
force Johnny’s gaze up and into his own.

“I don’t know if you can take this, Johnny, all at once, but you’re
going to have to try.”

“I got a second job, nights,” said Johnny hollowly. “With that I can
catch up some on the bills. Don’t put my wife on the charity list,
doctor. She couldn’t stand it. She—”

“Now you just listen to me, young fella.” He reached into the wall, got
a paper cup from a dispenser and filled it from the ice-water jet. With
his other hand he reached into his side pocket and took out a folded
paper, which he planked down on Johnny’s knee. “The bill. I want you to
look at it.”

Painfully, Johnny unfolded it and looked. His jaw dropped. “So much …”
Then his eyes picked up an additional detail on the paper. “P-p-paid?”
he whispered.

“In full,” said Dr. Tremble. “That’s point one. Point two, Madge gets
her operation. MacKinney from the Medical Center got interested in the
case. He’s going to do it next week. Point three—”

“Her operation …”

“Point three,” laughed the doctor, “she gets that room to herself now,
all paid up, and you have the privilege of telling that to her snide
roommate. Point four, here is a check made out to you for five hundred.
Drink this,” and he pushed the water at him.

Johnny sipped, and over the cup said, “B-but wh-where …”

“Let’s keep it simple and say it’s a special fund for interesting cases
from the Medical Center, and you know these endowed institutes—all this
money is interest and there’s nobody to thank so shut up and get out of
here. No—not to see Madge! Not yet. You go down to the office and
they’ll cash that check for you. Then you grab a taxi and voom down the
street and buy flowers and a radio and a big box of dusting powder and a
fancy bed jacket. Git!”

Numbly, Johnny walked to the door. Once there, he turned to the doctor,
opened his mouth, shook his head, closed his mouth and without a word
went for the elevators.

Laughing, the doctor went down the corridor to the telephone booth,
dropped a coin, dialed the poolroom.

“Gorwing there?”

“Speaking.”

“Tramble. All set.”

“Yeah, doc, I know. I know. Oh God, Doc, it’s so _quiet_ in this town …”



HOW TO KILL AUNTY


“Little devil,” said the old lady admiringly, which was odd, because she
detested squirrels, especially when they were after the birdseed and
suet set out on the feeder. Birds make a great deal of difference to the
bedridden. Yet, “Oh, but you have got a brain in your head,” she
murmured, for the squirrel, after two futile attempts to climb out to
the feeder, was making for the slender branches directly above it.

Squirrels she detested, and unpunctuality, physical sloppiness, rice
pudding, greed, advertising (especially TV commercials, of which she saw
a great many), dull-wittedness and Hubert. Hubert, her nephew, was not a
dish of rice pudding nor a squirrel, but he embodied everything else on
the list.

Partly.

Maybe that was it, she thought, admiring the detestable squirrel. Right
down the line, from how Hubert looked to what he did (he was an
assistant producer—that is, general factotum, bottle-washer, squeezer of
shaving cream onto whipped-cream desserts, source of yes-sirs for all
the business and all the talent—for a TV commercial packager) Hubert was
what she detested—partly. Even mostly. But in no case altogether.

That squirrel now, she thought, leaning out, reaching up over the bed
for the brass handle which swung there; that squirrel is all squirrel,
the pretty little, speedy little criminal. Letting her weight come on
the handle, she reached for the loop of quarter-inch rope which hung
from a brass fairlead sunk into the window frame. Holding it carefully,
she worked her way back to the center of the bed, let go the brass
handle, and sat alertly watching the scene outside. At the very instant
the admirable, damnable squirrel dropped from the tree-branches toward
the feeding deck, the old lady pulled on the cord, and the feeder,
sliding up its guy wires, moved out from under the animal, which
snatched vainly at it, then hurtled down spraddle-legged to the lawn. It
bounced like a rubber toy, then scampered angrily away, its tail drawing
exact trajectories of each long bound.

A little out of breath, the old lady swore cheerfully at it and released
the rope, so that the feeder slid back to its resting place among the
outer shoots of the birch tree. Like certain other devices around the
place, the feeder was her deft idea and Hubert’s ham-handed workmanship.
There again, she reflected. He wasn’t altogether three-thumbed. He
_could_ turn out a job of work. But he got things right only by trying
every wrong way first. She shuddered at the memory of the weeks of
bully-ragging she’d put him through to get it done. Anyway, it worked,
and could be drawn up to her window every morning to be filled.

She glanced at the clock and put her hand under her pillow for the
remote control switch of the television. She saw a lot of television,
and, unabashedly, she enjoyed it. Especially now. She enjoyed this
particular television set even when it wasn’t turned on. Hubert was
trying to kill her with this television set, and she was knocking
herself out trying to help him.

This was a totally different project from any birdfeeder. That had been
done by nag and prod. The TV operation was far more subtle; suggestion,
planned convenience, and an imitated stupidity on her part which Hubert
was too stupid to know was imitated. And yet—she’d reluctantly
admit—there was a certain doggedness about Hubert, this time. Of all the
“almost” things he was, about this one thing he really seemed willing to
plug along until he got what he wanted.

He had first tried to kill her—oh, a long time ago, now. It was because
of Susie Karina. Well, perhaps there were other things, going back
years, but Susie brought it to a head. Susie was a housemaid, and like a
fool the old lady had let her live in, never dreaming that Hubert would
make a fool of himself over any woman, but if he did, it wouldn’t be
Susie. Well, she’d been wrong about that. The old lady was never wrong
about money or pulleys or birds or bonds or timing-gears, but in the
course of her long and lively life, so filled with things to do to keep
herself to herself—every dime she had, she had earned—she had bypassed
the intricacies of this Thing that seems to be going on between men and
women all the time. It was the one area where she could guess wrong, and
she certainly did this time. Susie was a small, downcast, black-banged
little thing with bite-able lips and a heart full of greed. The old lady
was not quite as wrong about Hubert—ordinarily he wouldn’t have dared to
raise his hat to a doxie on a desert island, so certain was he of his
unfailing unattractiveness to women—but neither he nor his aunt reckoned
on Susie’s barbarous ability to slide out of the camouflage and light
fires with damp fuel. Score a man for his technique with women and
you’ve drawn the height of his defenses, give or take a little; so a man
like Hubert, whose total experience had been a game of post office when
he was ten (by unanimous vote the girls sent him to the dead-letter
room) was about as hard to get to as the bottom of a ski slope from
halfway down.

It had actually gone on for months, right in her house, right under her
nose. Not only was the girl quiet and, at her specialty, clever, not
only was the old lady tuned to other wavelengths; Hubert was so benumbed
by the experience that even this intimate aunt could not tell his change
from the norm. He did not begin to stay out nights, nor sit and moon any
more there his usual great deal, and there were no financial flurries at
all—Susie coldly set her sights higher than her hat, even a new one.

The old lady, of course, did not know this, even after the silent
discovery and quiet excision of the menace. It was quite by accident
that she glanced down the stairwell at half-past two one morning and.
saw her nephew emerging from, of all places, the dining room, of all
things blowing kisses into it. The old lady slipped back into the
shadows and had ample opportunity to watch Hubert ascend, grinning
fatuously and carrying not only his shoes but his underwear. He passed
the thunderstruck watcher all unknowing and entered his room and shut
the door, whereupon his aunt, a spry old girl and very fast on her feet,
dusted down the stairs like a windblown oat-straw and appeared in the
dining-room door.

Four wide solid ancient chairs were placed side by side on the heavy
rug, and at the near end of the row hung a dark blouse and a white
brassiere. At the far end, for one brief second full of shock and
scorching hate, stood Susie Karina, clad in the skirt which matched the
blouse. The faint glow from the tiny night light in the hall was enough
to photograph the scene for both of them forever; then Susie melted
backwards into the black shadows and disappeared. Without hesitation the
aunt followed—it was the butler’s pantry—and shot the heavy bolt on the
dining-room side. She then stepped round to the kitchen and locked the
other pantry door. Not a word was spoken; save for the snicking of the
bolts, there was no sound.

The aunt made the rounds downstairs, being sure that everything was
locked up tight—except for the pantry window, which opened easily into
the wide wide world—and then, taking the garments from the dining room
between thumb and forefinger and holding them not quite at arm’s length,
she took them to the maid’s quarters where she briskly and neatly packed
all of the girl’s possessions. She secured, from the wall safe, two
weeks’ wages, added that to the luggage, and strapped it up. She took it
to the kitchen, unlocked the back door, set the two suitcases upon and
between the garbage cans, went inside, locked up and went to bed.

She did not know women, but she did know Hubert, and she knew Susie knew
Hubert, and that Hubert’s reaction to any scene, any emergency, would be
blindly to do as he was told, and not by Susie. How long it took Susie
to ponder this out she was never to know, but that Susie got the message
was clear the next morning when the aunt looked out and saw the luggage
gone.

Hubert still healthily slept. The aunt prepared breakfast and them
called him commandingly. When, yawning and yapping, he entered the
dining room, she said, “Put the chairs back, Hubert.” Hubert looked once
into the kitchen, once at the spectacle of his aunt carrying a tray, and
then the blood drained from his face. He put the chairs back. He sat on
one. He ate his breakfast.

Actually the only thing that was ever said directly about the episode
was said two nights later, when, after dinner, he rose casually and
sauntered, with all the skilled histrionics of a spear-bearer on the
first night of a high-school play, out to the hall tree where his hat
hung. His aunt then spoke: “A private detective will follow you wherever
you go. He reports to Mr. Silverstein.” Now it happened that Mr.
Silverstein, who was the lawyer who changed bequests in wills and all
that, was also the silent and controlling partner in the advertising
agency in which Hubert had just then begun.

Hubert paused. His wage was small and his address excellent. His
expenses were almost nothing and his comfort considerable. His ability
to provide these things—or anything at all—for himself was negligible.
He left his hat where it was and went upstairs without a word. In due
course they retired for the night.

Now it must be said that up to this point the old lady’s actions had
most genuinely been motivated by concern for Hubert; he could certainly
not pursue his career properly in a town this size in such company as
Susie Karina, even if the arrangement were legitimized; he had too much
going against him as it was. And she had no intention, then, of
punishing him. In her odd way, she felt the stirrings of respect for
him—not for his specific acts, the charm of which was lost on her, but
for his extraordinary success in pulling wool over her sharp old eyes.
For she was, to the bone, an admirer of virtuosity, for its own sweet
sake. She admired the music, for example, of Fritz Kreisler, not for its
music, but for its fingermanship. She admired the better circus jugglers
for the same reason and to the same degree. She owned a piece of jade
carved with some symbols which, had she tracked them down, would have
led her to a truly remarkable history, but her only interest in it was
that it consisted of eight filigree balls, one inside the other, all
freed from the same stone; never mind what it represented, where it had
been, by whom owned to whom it meant what; just look at that for a
clever thing, now! So for this gleam of deftness in her lump of a nephew
she was happy to forgive and forget—though she saw no reason to reward
him for it. Or to replace what it had cost him.

Mrs. Carstairs, the new maid, certainly did not. She immediately took
over Susie’s place, space and responsibilities—a weary soul who wore an
aura of such a nature that the less the distance from her, by the
inverse square law, the more one felt one had been munching saltpeter.
Mrs. Carstairs was there asleep—actually, it was only her second night
in the house, when it happened.

Again it was in the earliest hours of the morning, and again the big
house was illuminated only by the speck of light glowing in the
imitation brazier in the hall.

The aunt woke in that sudden, silent fashion which marks alertness to a
sound which had now ceased; an opening of the eyelids with a click, a
throat-throbbing, instant eagerness to pursue the very last echo of
something gone but vitally important. The old lady threw off the covers
and rolled to a sitting position and, in spite of the hard difficult
thump of her heart, held her breath.

She heard a low, happy, whispering laugh. She barely heard it. It was
unvoiced, and came from somewhere indeterminate.

She rose to her feet, and again held her breath.

She heard that childish, effortful sound of someone emphasizing a kiss:
mmmm-yuh!

She ran on tiptoe to her door, across from which was the head of the
stairs, and stopped again to listen.

What moved her, what sent her moving, sprinting, springing to the stairs
was nothing at all. But nothing, not a sound, not a breath. She could
have borne anything else, but not this waiting for the next sigh, smack,
chuckling tongue-cluck; not this wondering where, wondering who.… How?
Mrs. Carstairs, did she know every lock, did … or was it—and so she
sprang.

And her first foot, the right foot, to step off the landing, flew out
and up, dragging the other with it, and so she lay in the air. After
that the observations, the memories they painted, were not so sharp. She
was sure something dark and rectangular flew away, out and down, as she
lay in the air, and curved to the steps below: then the cruel crash at
the base of her spine and the small of her back (but no no no pain,
horribly no pain!) and her elbows; and oh, that was the agony.

It was dark already; it did not grow dark for her; the dark grew black.
But in the last clouded second before eclipse, she seemed to see a small
someone dart from the dining room, scoop up the rectangular thing, a
thing thicker than a briefcase, not as wide or long, and flick away with
it. Then a flash of light as Mrs. Carstairs came fumbling into the
hall—only a flash because of the greater flash of torture from her
elbows, and the black.

Eleven years.

Eleven years she thought about it. You can think a lot in eleven years.
You can think a lot in bed. You can think a whole lot in eleven
bedridden years.

It doesn’t have to drive you crazy, knowing you’ll never walk again, not
even when you had always walked, yes, run, yes, up until so recently
skied, skated, trudged, hiked. (Never danced, though: now, now that was
a good thing.)

What happened that night? Was it what she remembered? She could never
quite be sure. And what had happened that she did not see or know about?
She’d never know. No one, after Mrs. Carstairs and Hubert came tumbling
sleepily out (they always claimed they heard nothing but the fall) and
the doctors and ambulance and police were in and out, nobody could
possibly piece together which doors were locked, or whether the pantry
window had been closed. What she said about dark rectangles flying under
her feet, about kissings and laughter somewhere—they listened so
carefully to the way she talked that they frightened her, and she
mentioned them no more. She might have, ten years later when Mrs.
Carstairs, grown slow and hobbly, was cleaning out the pantry and found
the old-fashioned carpet sweeper thrown far under the big solid maple
butcher table. It had no stick and the brushes were worn away, but it
had four good wheels and it was just exactly large enough to hide in the
shadows, say, on one step of a flight of stairs. But the aunt never saw
it, and Mrs. Carstairs never mentioned it; why should she? It wasn’t
good for anything, and besides, it had a big dent in the top as if it
had been stepped on; so she just threw it away; it lay for a day on the
garbage cans, looking like a little suitcase.

There was Susie Karina; what ever happened to Susie Karina? Why, she got
a better deal from another nothing, name of Smith or something, whose
important father owned a car dealership dealing in cars so important
they sold themselves; the younger Smith was called the salesman. She
married him, and he really loved her, which she didn’t fully realize
until he shot her as she was about to make a still better deal for
herself. So she no longer mattered to Hubert and his aunt if, indeed,
she ever really had. The big thing in their lives was each, the other;
Susie had just cleaned up the issue.

Bedridden, the aunt now imprisoned him. He had tried to kill her (or the
girl had, which was altogether the same thing) and for that she flung
her coils around him, coils of business, of banking, of guilt and habit
and demand (the threat kind of demand: the sheer nuisance kind of
demand). Numb, bound, inarticulate, helpless, he stayed. The only
wrinkle in the gelid stream of his life was when he had left the low
level of the advertising business which would have lasted the rest of
his life had he stayed, for a lower level in television; and anyone but
Hubert could see that in some years’ time he would elevate himself to
about where he had been in advertising, and stay there for the rest of
his life.

And what did Hubert think about? It is quite possible he thought not at
all; this he was equipped for. But he could feel, and his aunt saw to it
that he did. She wasped and prodded him and sat him down and walked him
away; she would demand his presence and then not talk to him, but stare
into the flat bland silver eye of the television to which she was
addicted, and if he shifted his feet she would shush him. And she read
aloud to him—car repair manuals, and highly specialized articles on bird
food, and legal reviews and murder stories, during all of which he sat
mute and moist outside—he was one of those heavyset men with a shiny
face—but puckering a bit from some internal drying. Or she would talk to
him: “My, Hubert, how little it takes to kill a man, how much sometimes!
Why, remember Doc Maginn, so hale and happy, stepped on a needle in the
pile of his bedside rug, dead in a week. Yet I’ve seen basket cases from
the First War, Hubert, everything shot away, legs, arms, eyes, voice,
hearing; still they live. You can live a long time in a basket, Hubert,
in a bed. Keep yourself alert, keep busy doing something, keep your mind
alive; have someone to wait on you—why—you can last forever that way,
Hubert. Hubert, get up. Sit over there.” And Hubert would get up and sit
down again over there, moved because she felt like moving him. Oh, she
hated him. Oh, she was going to kill him, she was killing him; and the
weapon she chose was time and abrasion; she was going to outlast him,
she was going to hammer out the length of her life thin and sharp and
long, long, and ease it into him up to the hilt till he was dead of it.
“Now put me to bed, Hubert, put your old aunty to bed. Close the blinds.
Open the window. Hubert,” she would snap if he began to decelerate, “pay
the rent!” He paid nothing in cash; he never had; he knew what she
meant. Earn your keep, do as you’re told, be what you’re for: pay the
rent. So every night he turned the TV to face her bed, he lowered the
blinds, opened the drapes, opened or shut the window, checked the heat.

She knew how everything worked; he understood none of it. By how many
leaves of the old-fashioned one-pipe steam radiator were hot, she could
tell him where to set the thermostat downstairs. By the size of the
picture on her TV she could tell how much voltage drop occurred in the
line, and by the way it changed, she could tell what caused it, and she
knew the difference between the effect of Mrs. Carstairs’ ironing
downstairs, and the use of the rotisserie in their neighbors’ house. She
could splice rope, and taught Hubert by the hour because he could not
learn: “Worm and parcel with the lay, turn and serve the other way,”
she’d chant at him, and watch him do it wrong even while he repeated it.
She invented things and made him build them. She had him fix a brass
handle to a rope from the beam overhead, so she could reach the window
sill or turn the TV to face the bed when he wasn’t there, or, after the
weeks it took him to rig it, the bird-feeder. And a headboard with
shelves and a buzzer and light to call him when he was asleep and one to
call Mrs. Carstairs. And a sick room tray with a little vise and a rack
for hand tools. And inventions on the inventions. A plaited rawhide grip
for the brass handle. A floor stand for the workbench so it didn’t
bounce when she used the jack plane. Remote controls for the TV: on,
off, volume, phone jack, in the days before they sold them with sets.
She had lived a variegated and busy life, in the long process of doing
something instead of the something she did not understand. She was a
pioneer of all the Rosie-the-Riveters, going to work in a Liberty engine
plant as a young girl; she was tiny then, and the only one in the place
with hands small enough to adjust the carburetor heat controls from
inside. She had been the first woman to be called Yachtsman at the Bar
Harbor Club, recklessly slamming a Star-class forerunner in the regatta.
She was a court reporter and studied law and was a legal
secretary—actually running a firm for the figureheads. She made a lot of
money and invested skillfully and made more, and hung on to every dime
of it. Now she had all this to devote to Hubert. Life was full. Life
always had been full.

Then Hubert tried to kill her again. She saw it coming right from the
very first, and just watched it come, wondering what on earth he was up
to. He was sneaking into her room when she was in the bathroom, doing
something, sneaking out. She soon found out what it was. He was
loosening the screws in the back of the TV.

It took days. He seemed to be operating on four across the top, three
down the side. She said nothing to him about it. He did nothing else
differently. He sat and was read to and cut his thumb on a spokeshave,
making her laugh, and later, when she came out of the bathroom on her
wheelchair—it was more table than chair, for it hurt her to sit up, and
she hated it—she would stop and check, and sure enough, he’d slipped in
and loosened them a bit more.

She could have stopped him in a second, with a word, but she was
fascinated. It went on for five days; on the morning of the sixth, after
he had gone to work, she got settled for her morning of TV and found the
set wouldn’t work. With her ring-on-a-rope holding her up, she reached
for the set and swiveled it around on its lazy-susan base. She pulled
out three of the loose screws and was able to bend the hardboard back
plate far enough to peer inside.

Tubes were gone.

She lay and pondered that. Was he (tender gesture) trying masterfully to
help her cut down on her excessive viewing? Or was this just a childish
and spiteful annoyance? Surely even Hubert knew better than that! Why,
for that he’d pay … oh Lord, for years he’d pay!

No, it was more than that. He was doing something in his bumbling way.
Only there had to be more to it.

“Hubert,” she said that evening after she had summoned him (she would
not permit him to eat with her), “something’s wrong with the TV.”

He did not act surprised or try any play-acting, beyond saying with a
rehearsed kind of promptness, “All right I’ll take it down to be fixed
tomorrow,” all in a flat uninflected voice; then he sat down where she
told him to. She talked to him and read to him; but there was a welcome
difference in the air; why, almost half the time she actually realized
he was there.

In the morning he grunted and bumped it downstairs, and in the afternoon
came bumping and grunting, a colored man helping him, with a new set. A
new grey modern streamlined set with a bigger screen than the old one,
and a smaller case rather unaccountably designed to offer the least
possible resistance to wind. “What on earth is that?”

“The other one is shot,” Hubert informed her. “The man said so. I bought
this one.”

“It’s horrible.”

“I already bought it,” said Hubert with a kind of faint doggedness.

She snorted and told him how to attach two wires to the back and how to
stick the plug in the socket. It had a very nice remote control on it,
with a station selector as well as volume, and on-off. She was mollified
as far as the set was concerned; but what on earth was his play?

She found out the next afternoon when Mrs. Carstairs hobbled up with her
arthritis and the mail. Alone with it, she found tucked among the ads
and the bills and the magazines, a periodical which she knew, the
instant she saw it, was late, though she had not missed it until now. It
was a consumer’s magazine—one of those outfits which tests goods bought
on the open market. The old lady always read the very print off it; she
spent her money, she used to say, she didn’t throw it away.

Why late? And why had the little semicircular seal that kept it closed
in the mail been slit?

Hubert? Had he picked it up, kept it a while, then dropped it in the
mailbox on his way to work? _Why?_

She riffled the pages. Soaps, hand-held can openers, table-model TV’s,
an Italian vs. a French miniature car.… _Table-model TV!_ Oh, that was
all. He just wanted to be sure and get one that was recommended.

She looked at the listing. It was there, all right. There was even a
picture of it. As to the recommendation—it was heartily, earnestly,
explicitly _not_. For this was the make and model, even (she checked
this laboriously, swinging perilously at the edge of the bed by her
strong right hand holding the ring from the ceiling) within a dozen
digits of the serial number—the very same lethal contraption which,
ungrounded and suffering slight damage from the overtightening of one
hold-down screw between chassis and the metal case, had already killed a
man and a boy.

She looked at the picture and the diagrams, and then at the set: “Oh!”
she cried in sheerest delight, throwing the magazine high in the air,
“How cute!”

Poor precious Hubert, nursing the place inside him where most people
keep the embers of hate, but which, in him, must certainly be a clean
little barely warm pot of pasteurized mush; oh, how cute! numbly
associating her with TV, TV with her, until one day—when was it? four,
five months ago, he heard about this set in the news; oh how he must
have mumbled and gnashed on the idea; how long must it have taken him to
find one? How hard did he have to think before he plotted out the
fiendishly clever idea of getting tubes out of her old set and claiming
it was finished? Oh, she thought, the little darling. He’s really
trying.

That night, for the first time in years, his numbed shiny face seemed to
move a little from inside, as if some good fluid were soaking the
parched places under the moist skin; for she was kind to him. She was
unquestionably laughing at him, but she was kind to him.

The next day, after Mrs. Carstairs had cleaned up, Hubert’s aunt fumbled
through her workbench and tools, and found a lamp socket and some heavy
wire. She connected two foot-long leads and screwed, in a bulb after
testing it. She chuckled the whole time, even when she underwent the
pain of bringing her wheelchair alongside and agonizingly rolling into
it. Grunting with pain and chuckling with laughter, she got to the
corner and put one wire against the steam pipe and the other against the
metal side of the new set.

Nothing.

Using the remote control, she clicked the set on. Again she touched one
wire to the set, the other to the pipe.

Still the bulb did not light. There was nothing wrong with this set.

Hubert … poor, poor old Hubert.

For a limp moment she ignored the pain and lay in the chair, wagging her
head from side to side in wordless pity.

This was as far as the poor addlehead could think. Get a set like the
one that had killed some people. Get it next to her.… What passed next,
in his fogbound mind could only have been, “… and then maybe some way
she …”

She could shake him, the poor darling! Didn’t he know that to be
electrocuted by house current, the electricity had to flow through the
body? Stand in a puddle, preferably with a good iron drain in it, and
stick your hand in a fuse box; then maybe. Or hold a water pipe and put
a wet thumb in a socket—then perhaps. But he must, with millions of
other people, share the notion that you could be killed by, for example,
current running from one side of your fingertip to the other side of the
same finger … or maybe the poor thing just didn’t have a notion at all.

Back in bed at last, and rested, she began to think of Hubert with pity
and tenderness. He’d worked so hard … and she wasn’t thinking of lugging
TV sets up and down stairs, either.

And such a clever idea, too, in its way. If he only knew what he was
doing.

She thought about it, and about him, all day long; and when at last she
knew what she was going to do, it was as if all the clocks in the world
had stopped; oh, how she ached for him to be here; oh, how she wanted
him near. Suddenly the world was bright again for her who had not
realized how dark it had become; here out of the gloom had come the
loveliest … oh, the most wonderful thing to plan, to work on.

Hubert needed help.

He couldn’t possibly do this by himself. He had to learn, to plan, to
fix, to arrange. And above all he had to feel he was doing it by
himself, because he wanted it so; anyone who worked so hard had to want
it very much. But it would be no good unless he was sure, all along the
line, that it in all its parts was his own doing.

So when he came upstairs that evening, and when she had portrayed enough
surliness with him to make him unsuspicious, she began.

_“Hubert!”_ It was said with a slightly rising inflection; in the
spectrum of her summonses, this one stood on the line that said, “Get to
work.” He started uneasily.

“My ring,” she said, pointing to her leather-handled, rope-dangled
helper. “”That rope stretches all the time.”

He looked at it with dim eyes. “Looks okay.”

“Well, you don’t have to use it. I want you to put up something that
won’t stretch.”

He tried hard. She could see him at it, like a toothless man gumming a
steak. “Chain,” he said at last.

She argued with him scornfully. Chain was pinchy and noisy. Wire rope
would fray after a time, sharp and splintery. And at last she had led
him to braided copper cable, which would be handsome, and though it
would stretch, it would stretch just so much and no more; and then she
led him like Socrates, asking demanding and argumentative question after
question, until he had no choice but to devise a big wide ring in the
beam above, a second ring in the beam in the corner, and anchorage to
something solid there, thus the cable could be taken up as it stretched,
until it would stretch no more. Laboriously he wrote down his shopping
list, and she spent a delicious night and day anticipating, and two more
happy evenings hammering at him until he had it just right. And all the
while she savored the delightful, and quite correct, thought that he
still did not realize how very beautifully that new cable would fit into
“his” sweet little plan. Oh, how she anticipated the moment of
revelation! How proud he would be, and hopeful. This, she thought, is
living. Where’s the woman, she thought (she often compared herself with,
categorically, “women”) who with all her so-called wiles, who knows what
this is like, to lead a poor dear man step by step—no; inch by inch—down
the very path you planned for him, and all the while let him think he’s
the one, he’s the one?

She had not felt like this in years. She had never felt like this. She
liked it. She liked it so much she let the whole thing rest for two
days, while happily she planned the next step the all-powerful male must
take.

“Oh … _Hubert!_” This in descending tones; this was the disappointment,
the “how _could_ you!” salutation.

“Whuh? Whuh?” he said rapidly, worriedly.

She held up the consumer’s magazine. “Of all the TV sets in the whole
wide world, why did you buy this one?”

He wet his lips. “Seems pretty okay.”

“Here!” she snapped. (Not even “come here.”) He rolled to his feet and
came, peering at the magazine. She demanded, “What are you trying to
do—kill me?”

He opened his mouth, closed it, lifted his hands and let them fall.
Finally he said, “Well, I got it awful cheap.”

Aloud, she read the account of the deaths. “I don’t doubt you got it
cheap,” she snorted, then looked up. “How cheap?”

He said, “A hundred and twenty off list.”

“Oh, well,” she said; and inside she hugged herself: oh, what fun!

She changed the subject. She said the rawhide on the brass handle hurt
her hand, and she made him find her utility knife and cut it away. While
he nicked and picked at it, she read aloud the other part of the
article, where it said that the set was otherwise very fine. She sounded
almost as if she forgave him. Anyway she let up on him, and with her
remote unit, turned the set on and they watched a crime show. Or he did.
She watched him. At the part in the TV play where the murderer
accomplished his evil deed—and it happened to be an old woman—she could
have sworn his dull eyes acquired a dim shine. He even stopped picking
away at the rawhide and sat down to watch absorbedly. For once she let
him, and it was all right; of his own accord he went back to it after
the show and finished the job. Oh you sweet boy, she thought, almost
fondly, for once in your sloppy life you’re altogether something; why
you dear, you’re just full of this thing.

She turned off the sound—but left the set on—with her control, thereby
wrenching him out of the Western which succeeded the murder play.
Perforce, he gaped at her. “You _could_ have killed me,” she said
accusingly.

“There has to be something wrong with the set first,” he said doggedly.
“The set’s all right, I tell you.”

“That may be,” she said. “But look.” She reached for the brass handle
above the bed and tugged at it. “Look, I’m grounded.”

He shook his head, mystified.

“The radiator!” she yelped at him. “Why did you have to anchor the cable
to the radiator?”

He scanned the cable, up from her hand, across from one beam to the
next, down to the radiator in the corner, behind the TV set. He
shrugged, not understanding. “You said anchor it to something solid.”

She had said to anchor it to the radiator, but she didn’t give him a
chance to remember that. “Don’t you see?” she shrilled. “Suppose there
was a short circuit to the TV case, the way it tells about in the
magazine, and suppose I had to touch it, like turn it toward the bed.
Don’t you see I’d be holding one with the other? Don’t you understand
_anything?_” She let him watch her cloudily, saw him swing his gaze from
her to the cable, the TV set, back to her; saw the stirrings of that
moment of revelation she had anticipated so much. “Stupid, stupid,
stupid!” she shrilled, “_this_ is what I mean!” and she flung her weight
on the handle and reached out for the TV set. “See?” she said, slapping
it. “See?” she said, turning it on its swivel. She regained the bed.

How shiny his face was. Suddenly she wanted to mop up that dull
excitement she could see moistening his parched core. She said coldly,
“Well anyway, I guess that proves the set’s safe for now.”

Through her lashes she watched him. For a split second she thought he
was going to cry. Then he slumped dejectedly and stared at the set. She
knew what he was thinking as well as if his moist brow had been equipped
with one of those electric signs with the moving letters. She knew he
was thinking how close he had come, and how never in a thousand years
would he be able to figure out the difference between this harmless
object and the one he had hoped it would be. She imagined further
thoughts—old familiar ones, doubtless, their path trodden smooth by his
years of plodding hatred: So bash her head in (but Mrs. Carstairs,
downstairs all the time …). Feed her a glass of warm milk with—(but he
never brought her milk, and she certainly wouldn’t touch it if he did).

 … or maybe these were only her own imaginings; maybe he wasn’t thinking
at all. He could do that, she was sure. Ha! she’d soon enough turn them
on again! She said, batting at the brass handle, and speaking very
softly as if to herself, “Couldn’t get closer to certain death if you’d
planned it,” and watching his widening eyes and the slight babyish
protrusion of his lower lip, she just knew he was saying to himself,
“She knows. Oh my God, I bet she knows.”

She felt a thrill of anticipation. Get him scared; oh fine. Fear will
make him move. And worry: let’s make him worry a little. “Tomorrow,” she
said, “we’ll just have to put up something else besides that copper
cable. Just too dangerous.” And she saw him look down into his hands and
pout miserably. (Was he thinking, _I’ll never get a chance like this
again_. Sure he was.)

Oh, he looked so miserable! Oh, did any woman ever have such a toy as
this? Let’s bring back the hope now.

She swatted the magazine explosively, making him jump. “It shouldn’t be
allowed!”

“Oh,” he mumbled, “the factory called them all back in. All they could
find.”

“I don’t mean that,” she said, and hit the magazine again. “This thing,
with the photographs and diagrams and all. Why, you know what this
amounts to, just this one picture of a screw tightened too much? Why,
it’s instructions, that’s what it is; any fool could take a safe set and
make a killer out of it, just by reading this. It shouldn’t be allowed!”
She took the magazine and flung it at his feet, making him jump again.
“Take the filthy thing out of here!”

His hands, she gloated, literally trembled as he picked it up. He rolled
it and turned it over and over between his hands. It was like a caress.
(Oh Hubert, she called silently, if you only knew how wonderful you
are!) “Yes, Aunty,” he said, his eyes on the magazine. He put it,
rolled, into his back pocket, and rose.

“Put your old aunty to bed.”

“All right.” Preoccupied, he did all the things he had to do with the
drapes, the shade, the heat, the TV, her covers, the lights. She was
glad when he turned out the lights; it had been hurting her face not to
smile openly.

What would he be thinking now? She knew: oh, she knew, especially
because—_“Hubert!”_—because, silhouetted in the door, he already had the
magazine out of his pocket, though it was still rolled. Ah, he could
barely wait! Imagine—Hubert eager, Hubert dedicated, Hubert
excited … and Hubert certainly wondering how on earth he would get the
chance to make that one little change, turn that one screw just far
enough to break the insulating washer. “Hubert!”

“Yes, aunty.”

“In the morning ask Mrs. Carstairs to turn up the hot water heater right
after breakfast. I’m going to have a good long hot soak. Just this once
I’m going to soak for a whole hour.”

He thought he was answering but his voice was lost in a peculiar abrupt
wheeze. Smiling in the darkness, she asked, “What, Hubert?”

“All right, Aunty; I’ll tell her.”

He went away.

She soaked for more than an hour. She drowsed, almost fell asleep in the
tub. In the first place she had been awake almost all night, smiling
most of the time, making little bets with herself. Even with a clear
photograph and a concise explanation, would Hubert be able to find the
right screw? Could there be any guarantee he’d turn it the right way?
Would he wait so long for the coast to be clear that he wouldn’t have
time to do it at all? She had forgotten, at first, about Mrs. Carstairs
and the Saturday cleaning, which she would certainly do while the old
lady was in the tub. She could all but see poor Hubert in his room down
the hall, an ear cocked to the arthritic housekeeper’s puttering about
in his aunt’s room, his eyes glued to the page in the consumer’s
magazine, reading it, over and over, moving his lips. A killer.

Hubert, Hubert. Dear Hubert. Maybe the silly old thing wouldn’t even try
to fix the set. Mrs. Carstairs left at last. There was long, long
silence. She began to doze.

A sharp sound snapped her out of it, and she literally clapped her soapy
hand over her mouth to keep in the burst of shrill laughter that filled
her mouth and throat. For dear dedicated worried fearful Hubert, with
the bone head and the ham hands, Hubert had dropped his screwdriver. The
picture of him, round-eyed and whey-faced, staring in terror at the
closed bathroom door, was almost more than she could bear.

More silence, a bit more hot water and another doze. She came to herself
with a start, and looked with amused horror at her wrinkled fingerpads;
she was as waterlogged as Davy Jones’ floor mop. She began the arduous
process of draining, drying, dressing, and loading the useless parts of
herself onto the agonizing wheelchair. She took as long as
possible … long enough. He was not in her room when he opened the door.

Back in bed, she composed herself for her Saturday televiewing, and with
her hand on the control, remembered. Then: why not? and she laughed and
clicked it on.

The sun was out. The birds were out. Hubert was out (she laughed)
shopping for rope for her helper-handle, for no matter what, he had his
orders. (Oh the fool; what on earth does he think he could with himself
without me? But isn’t he the one? Isn’t he the gutsy boy, though?) The
TV was excellent, all of it, even the commercials. She thoroughly
enjoyed her afternoon.

At last he came up. She did not greet him; she wondered too much what he
would say. She had been philosophizing about murder and the murderer: at
what exact point did a man become a murderer? According to the law, when
the victim died, be it a microsecond or forty years after the attack.
But was that really so? When a man pulls a trigger, and the bullet is on
its way, and it’s too late for anything but death to happen, is he not
already a murderer? Hubert now: Hubert had already pulled his trigger.
She might have died any time today. As a matter of fact, she had lain
impotently watching a big grey squirrel gobbling up all the suet from
the feeder, because she had rather not take hold of that brass handle
and swing herself so close to the TV in order to reach the feeder-rope.

And Hubert, out shopping: was he wondering if he would come home to a
curious sidewalk and the white wailing of ambulances? She had purposely
not called him, and he had delayed downstairs until quite late,
doubtless screwing up his courage for the trip upstairs to find—what?—in
her room. Surely he had not reckoned on being the one to discover her.
She could almost hear his half-articulate complaint: after all he had
done, did he have to go through all that too?

She resisted a temptation to arrange herself sprawling on the carpet
between the bed and the TV, to lie still until he bent over her, and
then to start laughing; a sure instinct told her that this was the way,
even with Hubert, to get herself not only murdered, but beaten to death
along with it. She contented herself with lying as still and—what was
the word? waxen was the word—as possible, with her eyes closed, until he
stood over the bed and murmured, “Aunty?”

She opened her eyes and he stepped back two paces and stood, not knowing
what to do with his hands. Still she waited, to see what he would say
next, and it was (the clumsy, blundering dunderhead), “Watch some TV
today, did you?”

She laughed and struggled up, elbow-walking back to her backrest. “Lots,
and it was fine. It’s late.”

“Yes, I … think I’ll go turn in.”

She tilted her head to one side and said, “Had a tough day, Hubert?” and
smiled at him. The quick, passing contraction of his features convinced
her he was shouting silently to himself, “She knows! She knows!”

“Well,” she said, “You’re going to put your old aunty to bed first.”

Did he hesitate? Did he really? Did he care? He seemed to be ready to
turn and walk out … or did he turn to remind himself that downstairs the
housekeeper kept a living ear, a remembering brain, and there must be no
quarrel for her to remember? He said docilely, “All right, aunty.”

“I think,” she said, “I’ll watch the late show tonight. I had a nap.”

“The late show, yes,” he echoed. He did the window blind and window
things, the drape things. Passing the TV, which faced her, he hit it
with his hip; it swung to face the door.

She nodded approvingly. She couldn’t have done better herself. She said,
“Hubert—turn the TV to me.”

“All right,” he said. But instead he came over and straightened her
covers. His face was especially shiny, and she could see the dark
marking of damp where his hands touched the bedclothes.

She began to laugh.

For the first, and, the last time in her life, she heard Hubert speak to
her in the imperative: “Don’t laugh,” he said.

She subsided, but she took her time about it, laughing all the way.
“Funny boy.” Suddenly she cut it dead and said coldly, “Turn that TV to
me.”

His back was to the set: he stood between it and her. “You can see it
all right from there.” He held his right wrist hard with his left hand.
She could see the shiver of the fabric of his trousers as his knees
trembled.

“We don’t want a quarrel for Mrs. Carstairs to hear,” she said
carefully.

“Oh gosh no,” he said fervently.

A crazy situation. Extraordinary. Delightful. This, she thought, is
living. “ ‘Turn the set, Hubert.” She smiled. “It won’t bite you. It
isn’t even on.”

He wet his lips, so wet already. His hands were wet, his face and his
mouth. His tears were wet, waiting to come. He whispered—she knew he
didn’t mean to whisper, but it was all he could manage—“You can reach
it.”

“All right,” she said suddenly, gently, with all the tones and overtones
of complete capitulation.

“Well I.” He said it as if it were a complete and sensible statement,
turned and marched to the door.

“Hubert!”

He stopped as if she had roped him. He was in the doorway; he stayed
where he was and did not turn. He was like a machine with brakes locked
and the clutch disengaged; but one could feel the motor racing; in the
split tatter of a second it would be gone from there screaming.

“Please,” she said gently (to _Hubert?_ Please?) “You forgot to check
the heat. You’ll do that for me, won’t you?”

His shoulders slumped and he turned back into the room. “Oh, sure, I
guess,” he said wearily. He crossed to the corner and leaned over and
felt the radiator. It was the metal top of the TV set that he leaned
over. His aunt moved her thumb _that_ much on the remote control and
turned the set on.

Hubert made the most horrible sound the aunt had ever heard; it was like
a particularly raucous sneeze—inward. She had read that sometimes when a
jolt first hits them they swallow their tongues, and then suffocate on
them. That is what Hubert was doing. One stiff hooked arm rested on the
top of the TV set, and the other stiff hooked arm rested on the
radiator, and his legs stuck straight out behind him with the toes
pointed, and quivered. Through the legs of his trousers, at the calves,
could be seen muscle mounding up in cramps like golf-balls.

“Kill me, will you?” croaked the aunt, but the set warmed up just then
and roared and drowned her out. She turned the volume down and stared at
Hubert’s legs and pointing toes sticking out from behind the TV set, and
knew with crushing certainty that from the very beginning she had set
things up to come out this way. She didn’t recall having purposely,
consciously done so; she knew only that she must have, that’s all. She
glared at the legs and said, “But you broke my back!”

All in all, that was a pretty good day. And night. Living; really
living. One of the best parts of all had to do with the police, who took
all of fifteen seconds to sniff out that there was more to this
“accident” than met the eye. There was a young man with two deep
measures of vivid intelligence for eyes, and a quick quiet voice; he
asked almost exclusively important questions, one right after the other.
Who brought that set in here? Who hung that cable from the radiator to a
point over the bed? Well, if it was rope before, who substituted woven
copper? Who took the leather grip off the brass handle?

Hubert, Hubert, Hubert.

Men came up and brushed fine white dust around the TV, and took off the
back and brushed dust inside, and photographed everything. Whose
fingerprints?

Finally, and funniest of all, was the man who regretted the accident,
who assured her that the police expert had removed the short circuit,
making the set now quite safe, but at the same time warning her to get
rid of it, just in case. Lastly, he hemmed and he hawed and he suggested
in extremely careful language that she not attempt to bring an action
against the set manufacturer in this particular case, in view of certain
technicalities which we needn’t go into at such a time as this “but I
faithfully assure you that if you don’t take my advice you will only
wish you had, and you will find out at great—ah—trouble to yourself that
I was right.” In short, it was unanimously agreed to conceal from this
little old bedridden lady that her nephew had gotten himself caught in
the vicious trap he laid for her. Why bother her with it? The only thing
that would ever force her to know it would be if she started lawsuits;
lying there like a real little old protected female woman, waxen as
possible, she agreed in a faint voice that they were right and she
trusted them all. It was grand fun. Her finish didn’t come until the
next afternoon, when a sniffling Mrs. Carstairs brought her the things
out of Hubert’s room to sort. There wasn’t much, and among the few
papers was the copy of the consumer’s magazine, still folded back open
to the article about the metal-cased TV set. Over this Hubert had
pondered and waited, and while waiting, had doodled, filling O’s and
putting mustaches on the faces of the consumers’ electronicians in the
photos. He had also written a sentence and a word.

It was as if Hubert had been denied understanding and intelligence and
the ability to articulate, all his life, the formless clouds of feeling
within him, in just and equal compensation for this single, simple,
devastating insight. He had written:

_Without me she is nothing but an old woman_.

And under that, in very large, careful letters:

OLD

His aunt read this and closed her eyes to consider it, and that was the
finish for her. When she opened her eyes again she looked at her hands,
skinny and crooken-a-clawed, and she pulled at her sparse white hair,
drawing it forward over her face to be able to look at it, through it.
All her life she had been too busy to be loved, too busy to be liked.
She had been too busy to have a childhood and she had been too busy to
be old.

Not any more. The Hubert business was the last thing she had to be busy
about; for years it had been everything and the only thing, and now
she’d finished it, and though she lingered on for a long while, it was
the finish for her.



TANDY’S STORY


This is Tandy’s story. But first, take a recipe: the Canaveral sneeze;
the crinkled getter; the Condition adrift; the analogy of the Sahara
smash; Hawaii and the missing moon; and the analogy of the
profit-sharing plan. There is no discontinuity here, nor is the chain
more remarkable than any other. They are all remarkable.

If this were your story, it might compound from the recipe of a letter
that never got mailed, a broken galosh clip, a wistful memory of violet
eyes, the Malthusian theory and a cheese strudel. However, it is
Tandy’s.

We begin then with the Canaveral sneeze, delivered by a white-gowned,
sterile-gloved man in a germ-free lab, as gently he lifted a gold-plated
twenty-three-inch sphere into its ultimate package. Not having a third
hand at the time, he was unable to cover his mouth in time.
_Gesundheit_.

And now to Tandy’s story.

Tandy’s brother Robin was an only child for the first two years of his
life and he would never get over it. Noël, her sister, was born when
Tandy was crossing that high step into consciousness called Three Years
Old. (Timothy, the other brother, wasn’t until later. Anyway, this isn’t
his story. This is Tandy’s story.)

When Tandy was five, then, it was clear to her that while the older
Robin was bigger, stronger, more knowledgeable and smarter (he wasn’t,
but she hadn’t been around long enough to learn that yet) and could push
her around at will until she yelled for help—while, to put it another
way, she was attacked from above—the sister below was excavating the
ground under her feet. Noël unaccountably delighted everyone else, even
Robin, for she was a blithe little bundle. But her advent necessarily
drained off a good deal of parental attention from Tandy, who lost the
household position of The Baby without gaining Robin’s altitude as The
Firstborn. It didn’t seem fair. So she did what she could about it. She
yelled for help.

It wasn’t any ordinary yell, if an ordinary yell is a kind of
punctuation or explosion or communicative change-of-pace. There were
times when it wasn’t, except for its purpose and figuratively, a yell at
all. It was at times a whine—a highly specialized one, not very loud but
strident, that could creep in and out of her voice twice in a sentence.
Or it might be merely a way of asking for something, and asking and
_asking_, so that she couldn’t even hear a “yes” and was not aware of
the point at which it furiously turned to a “no.” Or perhaps an
instantaneous approach to tears, complete with filling eyes and twisting
mouth, where anyone else might use the mildest emphasis: “It _was_
Tuesday I wore the blue dress, not Monday,” and the equally
instantaneous disappearance of the tears (which, somehow, was the
annoying part). Or utter, total, complete, unmoving non-response to an
order through the third, the fourth, the fifth repetition, and then a
sudden shattering screech: “I _heard_ you!”

Tandy had, in short, a talent approaching genius for getting under one’s
skin and prickling.

This established, it is mere justice to all concerned to report also
that Tandy was loved and lovable as well. Her parents took the matter of
child-rearing seriously. The reasons (over and above innate talent) for
Tandy’s more irritating proclivities were quite known to them. And
Tandy, long-lashed, supple, with hair the color of buckwheat honey and
golden freckles spattered across her straight perfect nose, was an
affectionate child, and her parents loved her and showed it very often.

And this did not alter one whit her position as No. Two Child, her
distaste for the role, her yelling for help and therefore, for all the
love, the concurrent war of abrasion.

There were times when she and Robin got along as contemporaries and
splendidly. And of course almost anyone could get along with the
biddable Noël. But these times were more wished-for than often. When
they occurred, they were so welcome that one is reminded of the lady
with the perennially battling children who called out into an unwonted
silence one mid-morning: “What are you kids doing’?” From under the
porch a young voice replied, “Burning the wrappers off these razorblades
with matches, Mommy.” “That’s nice,” she replied, “Don’t fight …”

At such times, in short, they could get away with practically anything,
and Tandy’s usual occupations were staged alone and away from people.

Yet never completely away.

Perhaps as a result of her crowded loneliness, she liked to be on the
outside looking in or on the inside looking on, but not of the group.
When the neighborhood gathered on the lawn for hide-and-seek or
kickball, and the game was well started, Tandy would be seen forty paces
off, squatting by the driveway, making a cake-sized cake of earth,
perhaps, and decorating it with pebbles and twigs; or acting out some
elaborate dialogue with her doll Luby (whether or not Luby was with
her), bowing and mugging and murmuring the while in a number of voices.
Tandy spoke beautifully. She had since the beginning, and her command of
idiom and tone was too expert to be cute. There were times when it was
downright embarrassing, as when the father overheard her demanding of a
peonybush, with precisely his own emphasis, _“What the hell are you,
hypnotized?”_

There were times when these performances at the edge of the activity of
others attracted considerable attention. She was surprisingly deft for a
five-year-old, being one of these kids who from birth, apparently, can
with a single movement draw a closed figure so that you are unable to
see where the ends of the line join, and whose structures with blocks
never seem jumbled, but quite functional (as indeed, to the fantasy of
the moment, they are). Once in a while she drew quite a gallery of the
curious with, say, six careful rows of red Japanese maple leaves and
deep pink trumpet-vine blossoms alternating on the lawn, before which
she would posture severely, murmuring under her breath and pointing to
one and another with a stick. At such times she seemed quite oblivious
to six or eight children magnetically drawn round her, who watched
mystified. Sometimes she would answer and sometimes she would not.
Sometimes it would take drastic measures, as for example Robin’s
shuffling through the careful arrangement of leaves and petals, before
it could be learned (the hard way, in this case) that she was teaching
school, that the leaves were boys and the trumpets girls, and that she
was now going to tell Mama to throw Robin’s Erector set into the
garbage, and a good deal more—precisely what more, no one knew, for by
then the screech would have destroyed intelligibility.

The crinkled getter was placed near the base and inside the metal
envelope of an RF amplifier tube in the telemetry circuit of the big
rocket’s second stage. The getter’s function was to absorb the residual
gases in the tube and harden the vacuum therein. Its crinkle was an
impurity, but so slight as to cause no trouble until the twelfth hour of
countdown. Then rarefied gas began to ionize and discharge and ionize
and Poop! discharge again.

To replace the tube required that they go back to twenty-four hours and
start the countdown again. The extra twelve hours delay enabled
sneeze-mist to dry on the sphere, and certain bacilli to die, and others
to encyst, and a smear of virus, sub-microscopically, to turn to a
leathery, almost crystalline jelly.

Tandy lived in a house in the woods which in turn were in, or nearly in,
the very middle of the upstate village, a pleasant accident derived from
the land-grabbing, land-holding traditions of three neighbors’ fathers,
and grandfathers, and great-grandfathers. The three acres on which
Tandy’s house stood were surrounded by perhaps twenty acres of other
people’s woods and a small swamp; yet the house was barely ten minutes
on foot away from the village green.

Somewhere, then, in house or garden, lawn, swamp or wood, the brownie
came to Tandy.

It had that stuffed-toy, left-out-in-the-rain aspect possible only to
stuffed toys which have been left out in the rain. It was about nine
inches high. Its clothing, or skin (properly, the outside layer was
both), was variously khaki-colored and mottled green. The appellation
“brownie” derived from what appeared to be a tapered hat, though once
the father was heard to remark that it was the damn thing’s head that
was pointed. The arms and legs were taut and jointless, and looked like
sausages on which lived lichens. For hands there were limp yellow-pink
leaves of felt, and for feet, what might have been the model for a
radical cartoonist’s rendering of the knotted moneybags of Old
Moneybags. As for a face—well, it was a face. That’s all. Black disks
for eyes, so faded you couldn’t tell whether they were supposed to be
open or closed, a ditto-mark for a nose and a streak below which may
have been some clumsy whimsy—a smile up on the right scowling downward
to the left—or a streak of dirt.

In the light of all that happened, one would think there would be a day
of discovery, an hour of revelation, an open-the-package kind of Event.
But there wasn’t.

The brownie was kicking around the place for weeks, months maybe; they
had all seen it, kicked it aside, used it as a peg for that parental
sigh, “Got to clean out all this junk sometime …” Robin dug a grave for
a dead cat once and then couldn’t find the cat, so buried the brownie
instead. Noël had taken it to bed with her once, and the mother had
thrown it out the window during the night. It was one of those things,
along with the bent but not quite broken doll carriage, the toy electric
motor with the broken brush and Noël’s wind-up giraffe, which needed new
ears. So the brownie wove its indistinct thread into the tapestry of
days, in and out of the margin between toys and trash.

The exact beginnings of Tandy’s preoccupation with the brownie were also
vague, and even when first her interest was total, it made little
impression, because Tandy was … Well, for example, the caterpillar. Once
when she was four she caught a tent caterpillar and kept him in a coffee
can for two days and named him Freddy and fed and watered him and even
covered him at night with a doll blanket. During the second night she
awoke crying, agonizing after Freddy, inconsolable until the can was
found and brought and shown to her. Her grandmother, who was around at
the time, said sagely, “That child needs a pet!” and everybody nodded
and conversed about pets. The next morning Tandy put Freddy on the
flagstones out front “so he could go for a walk.” He went for a walk.
Altogether.

For half a day people tiptoed around Tandy as if she were full of
fulminate and had dined on dynamite.

But not only did she not ask about Freddy, she never even mentioned him.
She stumbled over the can and almost fell and kicked it away and did not
even glance at it. Thereafter Tandy’s preoccupations were beyond
judgment or prediction; they might be blood-sistership, like the affair
with her doll Luby Cindy, or they might be passing passions like Freddy.
The brownie … well, people became aware not that Tandy had a new one,
but that for some indeterminate time she had been orbiting around this
artifact. And when Tandy orbited, so did the cosmos or it—all of
it—would be accountable to Tandy.

Mention of orbit brings up the Condition adrift. No other name for it
will do, and even that is inaccurate. It was … well, matter; but matter
in such a curlicue, so self-involved in stress, that Condition is a
better word than Thing. It had been made where it was useful to its
makers, and one might say it had a life of its own though it had not
used it in some millions of megayears. By a coincidence as unlikely as
the existence of the reader of this history or a world to read it on,
but as true, the Condition adrift found itself matching course and speed
with the golden ball in space. It contacted, interpenetrated, an area of
the golden surface four by eight microns, and happily found itself a
part of organic material—a dried and frozen virus and two encysted
bacteria. The latter it dissected and used. The former it activated, but
in a wild reorganizing way so radical its mammy amino wouldn’t have
recognized it. The Condition became then a Thing (without losing its
conditional character) and it scored itself across and divided. And
divided again. And that was the end of that, for it had used up its
store of a certain substance too technical to mention, but as necessary
as number. Such was the nature of this organism that once alive it must
grow, but if it could not grow it must cease dividing, and if it ceased
dividing it must undergo an elaborate, eons-long cycle before it could
come round to being again a mere Condition adrift. But unless it could
begin that cycle it must die.

By means known to it, it flowed through the lattices of the sputtered
gold, quartered the sphere, searched and probed, and at last stopped.

It turned its attention to the great globe underneath.

Some time or other—it was in the early spring, though Tandy herself
could never remember just when—she got the brownie a house. Actually it
was an old basketwork fishing creel she had found behind the garage, but
the one thing one learned most quickly about Tandy was that things were
what she said they were. Anything else was only your opinion, to which
you were not entitled. And there was a certain justice in her attitude,
for it did not take long for such an object to lose its creelship and
become what she said it was.

She set it against the back wall of the garage, in the tangled ground
between the wall and the old stone fence, under the shelter of the
adjoining carport—for a wall-less shelter had been hung to the side of
the garage to accommodate the second car they hoped for some day. It was
a nice sort of outdoors-indoors place. She drove a row of stakes in
front of the creel and on it placed a rectangle of discarded plywood—a
miniature of the carport—but as time went on she added walls. First they
were cardboard. The creel was the bedroom and the rest of it was the
living room.

At Easter she saved her basket and it was a bed. She got the brownie up
every morning and put him to bed every night, and on weekends he took
his nap too.

She fed him.

She had a small table—not a cream cheese box, a table!—for him, and on
the table were clamshell plates and an acorn cup, and a
pill-bottle—strike that; a flower vase—which, from the time spring first
started to show her colors, she kept supplied. But before that she was
feeding him snow ice cream, sawdust cereal, mushroom steaks, and wooden
bread. She talked to him constantly, sometimes severely. And in that
unannounced way of hers, she spent all her free time with him.

No one noticed it especially, in March and almost through April, except
perhaps to be grateful for the quiet. A minute spent with the brownie
was a minute without Tandy’s moaning, whining, sobbing, screeching or
otherwise yelling for help. Of course, there had to be minutes spent
away from the brownie. Most of them were at school.

School was kindergarten, of course, and it may have been that there was
just too much of it for Tandy. Due to factors of distance and
necessities of school buses, the kindergarten was not, as is usual for
such establishments, a nine-to-noon affair, but instead lasted for the
whole school day, ending at three. In spite of a long rest period after
lunch, it was the opinion of many that this was asking too much of
five-year-olds. It may have been the teacher’s opinion as well. It was
certainly Tandy’s opinion. Her first report card was not resoundingly
good, and her second one was somewhat worse. Neither was bad enough to
cause concern, but the parents were jolted by the specific items on
which she scored worst. Beside the item _Speaks clearly and distinctly_
the teacher had marked the symbols which meant “Hardly ever,” and beside
_Knows right from left_ was the mark for “Seldom.” The parents looked at
one another in amazement, and then the father said, “That can’t be
right!” and the mother said, “That can’t even be Tandy. She’s given her
the wrong report card!”

But she had not, as the mother found out by visiting the teacher at
school one afternoon.

The mother, going in like a lion, came out numb with awe for the
teacher’s forbearance, and for the second time (Robin had done this to
her once, on another matter) suffering that partly amused but
nonetheless painful experience of learning how little one knows of one’s
own. Or as the bemused father put it, “It’s a wise father who knows his
own child.” For, fully documented and with inescapable accuracy, the
teacher had described a Tandy they never saw around the house—a Tandy
recalcitrant, stubborn, inactive, disobedient and, most incredible of
all, talking incessant baby talk. The teacher’s ability to see below the
surface, to know that the child wasn’t _really_ as bad as all that,
helped the overall picture not at all, because it became manifest that
Tandy did not know right from left on purpose; that she spoke baby-talk
by choice; that she fell from grace in matters of handkerchiefs and
handwashing not because she forgot, but because she remembered.

Above and beyond everything else was that the degree of this behavior
was by no means excessive. She had never once been subjected to the
routine punishment of being made to stand out in the hall. She could
always stop just short of outright delinquency. She was the foot that
drags, the pressure which is not quite toothache, the discomfort which
is not yet heartburn.

The parents conferred unhappily with each other and then with Tandy, who
answered every “Why?” with “I just—” and an infuriating shrug, rolling
upward of the eyes, flinging the hands out and down to flap helplessly
against the thighs. It was the mother’s exact gesture, which of course
is precisely why it was infuriating.

So the father, his anger at last arriving, drew a bead on Tandy with his
long forefinger and declared, “This is a _rule_. No more brownie.”

The analogy of the Sahara smash is the anecdote of one of the desert
crashes of a B-17 in Africa. Unlike tragic others, this one had a happy
ending, and this is why: the crew made no attempt to trek out of there
in a body, but instead assigned one man to march out and get help. The
significant thing is that he carried with him not only a compass, but
almost their entire water supply. The rest of the crew rationed
themselves down to three tablespoons a day and lay as still as possible
buried in the sand under the broken fuselage. So it was that the
organism on the golden satellite told one of itself to ooze patiently
out to the tip of one of the whip antennae; then, by means known to
it—for as related, it contained unheard-of stresses, neatly curled up
and intertwined—it bent the whip double and released it, and out into
the emptiness, in the opposite direction from orbital motion, was
snapped this infinitesimal fleck of substance. It tracked along with the
satellite for a long time, but separating always, until it was lost in
the glittering emptiness. But with it it carried all but a fraction of
the organic substance available to the whole. Three parts were left
quiescent, waiting moveless to die or be saved. The fourth fell toward
Earth, which took—as long as it took …

Now there is a school of control-by-giving (hits in the head or ice
cream) and a school of taking away, and the father, when aroused, tended
to the latter. In extreme cases a child can learn never to express
preference or fondness for anything lest he qualify it for the
disciplinary list. This was not that extreme. It would not be because of
the mother, who despised this kind of thing and whose reactions were
very fast. One glimpse of Tandy’s stricken face at this “No more
brownie!” dictum and she added. “… if you go on making people unhappy.”
And, ignoring the father’s stifled cry of rage, she went on, “Now you
run on out and talk it over with the brownie.”

Tandy did as she was told, leaving her parents to instruct one another
about child-rearing, and communed with the brownie; and perhaps this was
the real beginning of it all.

For she had done a great deal for this brownie. Now, for the first time,
she had made it clear that there were things that needed doing for her.

If things changed at school, it was naturally not immediately apparent
at home. Things at home did not change. That is, the busy-ness with the
brownie continued to use up the whining time, the screeching time, the
opportunities for chance medley and battle royal with Noël and Robin.

One weekday morning the mother had hung out a line-full of clothes and,
being face to face with the garage, was moved to go round and see how
Tandy was coming along with Project Brownie. She hadn’t seen it for some
weeks. She recalled vaguely that the cardboard sides had been replaced,
and she knew that the tiny flower-vase had borne violets, and baby’s
breath, and alyssum. And she recalled the time she had turned out her
sewing basket and the kitchen gadget drawer and rearranged them, all in
one morning, and had given the detritus to Tandy for her brownie. Time
was when Tandy would have gathered up such a treasure-trove with a
shrill shriek of joy, would have fought selfishly and jealously with the
other children over the ownership of every ribbon-end, every old cork
and worn-out baby-bottle nipple, only to leave bits and pieces
exasperatingly all over the house and yard within the next couple of
hours. But this time she had spread the whole clutter out on the living
room table, darted her deft small hands in and out of the pile, and in a
few seconds had selected the blunt end of a broken nutpick, the china
handle of a Wedgewood pitcher, a small tangle of pale blue
nylon-and-wool yarn, and a brass wing-nut. “He wants these,” she said
positively. “That’s all?” the mother had asked, astonished. And Tandy
had replied, precisely mimicking the father, “Now what would a brownie
want with all that junk?” It wasn’t so much the modesty of Tandy’s wants
that had surprised the mother. It was the absolute and unhesitating
certainty with which she chose.

Thinking of this, the mother rounded the garage and saw the brownie’s
house.

The old creel was still the bedroom, but the rest of the structure had
vastly altered. The cardboard walls had been replaced with wood—some
ends of shiplap that used to lie under the sleeping porch—and since the
mother had heard nothing of any carpentry by or for Tandy, she could see
that the stony ground had been carefully and laboriously dug to various
depths so that the little boards, buried upright, could present an even
eaveline. On one side were two small square window-openings, glazed with
cellophane; on the other was a longer opening like a picture-window. The
roof, still the castoff piece of plywood, had been covered with a layer
of earth, and smoothly, brilliantly, it was thatched with living
star-moss.

The mother knelt to look inside. The floor of the house was covered with
a blinding-white powder of some kind. She took a pinch of it and felt it
and smelt it and even tasted it a little without recognizing it; she’d
ask Tandy later. The table was covered with a cloth which had once been
part of a dust-rag which had once been one of the mother’s dresses; it
was spotlessly clean—it seemed to have been ironed—and was so folded and
placed that the torn edges were out of sight. On the table was the
pill-bottle flower-vase, just half full of clean water, in which stood a
single stem and blossom of bleeding-heart. The effect was simple,
tasteful, sort of Japanese-y. And further inside was the creel bedroom,
with an oval dresser (despite the neat cloth cover and skirt, she
recognized the lines of an inverted sardine tin) over which was the
mirror which had been in Tandy’s birthday pocketbook, and before which
was a handsome little round chair, made of a bit of cardboard glued to a
large wooden thread-spool, also covered and skirted with a scrap of
material matching the dresser. And in bed was the brownie.

The mother had to go down almost flat on her stomach to see what it was
which covered his pillow so whitely, so clean and thick-textured. A
luxury material indeed—dogwood petals. He was covered with a quilt (she
couldn’t bring herself to call it one of her old pot-holders) and he was
sleeping.

She chuckled at herself. How were those round black painted eyes to look
open or closed? … and she looked again and thought they were open. She
almost said “Excuse me!” and she actually did blush at disturbing his
nap. Wagging her head, she backed away and stood up.

Between her and the old stone fence was usually a carpet of weeds. There
was no pretense of making lawn or garden out of the stony soil here.
Actually, the front lawn had been grown on trucked-in topsoil. Yet—

Yet this area was now planted. A row of early marigolds between the
brownie’s house and the onetime weed-bed. And, from there to the fence,
a dark-green plant, low, spidery, in rows. She did not recognize the
plant except perhaps as just another weed.

Speechless, she returned to the house.

Trouble on the school bus that day; Robin came home bloody and
triumphant.

Mother had meant to talk about brownie, but it was some time before
events sorted themselves out. It appeared that a “big kid” had started
chanting the well-known chant about “I seen Tandy’s underwear,” and
Robin had punched him and gotten clobbered for it. The bus monitor broke
it up, and in spite of Robin’s having gotten the worst of it, he came
home bursting with pride and Tandy awash with admiration.

The mother felt both. It was the first time Robin had ever brought arms
to bear in defense of his sister, and after the question and
cross-question and verbal jigsaw-puzzling which is always necessary to
get an anecdote out of a child, and the awkward telephone conversation
with the parent of the party of the other part, she found herself alone
not with Tandy, but with Robin, Tandy having escaped to her
preoccupation behind the garage.

“Robin, I don’t like fighting but I must say, I like the way you took up
for Tandy.”

“Aw, she’s okay,” said Robin, not noticing how the mother of what he
usually called that little tattletale, that squeaky wheel, that
pushfaced squint-eyed bow-legged stoop … how the mother of this
repulsive sibling let drop her jaw, and slumped into a chair.

She was still sitting there, trying to recover her strength, while Robin
pedaled away on his bicycle and while, a moment later, Tandy came in.
She came totteringly, mounded down with clean laundry. The mother leapt
up to help her get the screen door open and then had to sit down again:
“Tandy!” she cried.

“Well, they was all dry, Mommy, so I brought them in.”

“They _were_,” said the mother weakly.

“Sure they were. Mommy …”

She was going to ask for something. If it was a diamond tiara, the
mother thought, she’d get her one if she had to murder for it. “Yes,
honey.”

“Mommy, would you teach me how to set the table? I could do it every day
while you get dinner.”

So for the time being the mother utterly forgot to ask any questions
about the brownie.

The mother thought about the brownie a good deal, although—perhaps it
was a remnant of her comical embarrassment at having caught him in
bed—she seldom went back there to look at the house. But one afternoon,
thinking about the neatness of the little table, the dresser and chair
and mirror, the shining white floor (what _was_ that stuff, anyway?) it
occurred to her that the three-year-old Noël would find that arrangement
back there irresistible, and she shuddered at the mental picture of Noël
bellying delightedly into the careful structure, churning up the white
floor, leaning too hard on the cheese-box table, tumbling the mossy
roof. “Noël …”

“?”

“Noël, we’ve all got to be specially careful of Tandy’s brownie house.
You wouldn’t ever play with it unless she asked you to, would you?”

Noël gravely shook her helmet of tight curls. “I not allowed.”

The mother tipped her head to one side and regarded the child. There
were a number of things Noël was not allowed to do which she … “But all
the same, you won’t go back there by yourself.”

“I not _allowed_,” said Noël with great emphasis, and simultaneously the
mother thought (a) that she’d like Tandy’s formula for not allowing if
it worked like this and (b) let’s keep an eye on Noël all the same.

It was demonstrated, about ten days later, just how unnecessary it was
to stand guard over the brownie’s house. It was a Saturday. The father
was home, Robin was off somewhere on his bicycle, and Tandy was slaving
happily away behind the garage. The father, from the front of the house,
called out, “Do you know what happened to the hand cultivator?”

The mother’s photographic memory saw it lying beside a row of green. Oh,
of course. “Noël, darling, run out behind the garage and get the
cultivator. Tandy’ll show you.”

Pleadingly, “No, Mommy!”

“Noël!”

“I not _allowed_ to!” said Noël, and incredibly, for she was a cheerful
child, she began to cry.

The first impulse was to lay on some muscle and authority, the next a
deep sympathy for the little one. “Oh … Noël …”

“I gon’ _hide!_” shrieked Noël in something very like Tandy’s special
rasping shriek; and go she did, hide she did, ineffectively (the mother
knew she was in the baby’s blue chiffonier) but with great purpose.
Apparently her “not allowed” was big enough to make it worth while
defying the giants. Sighing, the mother went to the back door. “Tandy!”

“Yes, Mommy …”

“Bring Daddy’s cultivator to him, he needs it!”

“The handle-fingers?”

“That’s right, dear.”

She watched Tandy, in a yellow dress, bounding from behind the garage
and heading for the front lawn. She waited until she saw the flash of
yellow again and called her to the back steps.

“Tandy, you must have been terribly rough to Noël about not playing with
your brownie. She’s afraid to go back there because you said she’s not
allowed.”

“No, I didn’t, Mommy.”

“Tandy!” (The explosion of the name alone was the mother’s favorite
curb.)

For the first time in many weeks Tandy began to pucker up, the eyes grew
bright, the mouth trembled. “I reely, reely, reely …”

Moving on impulse, the mother stepped forward and took Tandy’s wrist.
“Shh, honey. Take me out and show me what you’re doing.”

Tandy immediately shut it all off and they went back of the garage,
Tandy skipping. The mother was prepared to be complimentary as one
normally is, multiplied by the wonder of what she had seen before; but
she was not prepared for what she found.

One wall had been removed from the little house, the shiplap scraps
unearthed and tossed aside. The roof was still supported by the other
side and the top of the creel. A heap of flat stones lay near, and a
small sack of readymixed concrete. A seed-flat was doing service as a
miniature mortar-board, and a discarded pancake-turner as a trowel.

Tandy was composedly replacing the wooden wall with one of fieldstone.

“Tandy! Why, I never … who taught you to do this?”

“I asked Mr. Holmes-the-gym-teacher.” (Tandy’s teachers’ names were all
compounded like this.)

“But-but … where did you get the concrete?”

“I boughted it. I saved my ’lowance money and all my ice-cream money.
That’s all right, isn’t it? I didn’t go into town, Robin did on his
bicycle.” She slopped water from a toy sand-bucket and began to mix the
concrete.

“Robin never told me,” said the mother faintly.

“I guess you never asked him, Mommy.”

“I guess I never.” The mother wet her lips. “Tandy, how did you ever
think of all this?”

“I didn’t think of it. I just did it, that’s all.” She picked up a
slather of cement and ladled it on to the top course of her new wall.
“You wouldn’t expect a brownie to go on living in a ol’ wood house, now,
would you?” she demanded in grandmotherly tones.

“No, I—I suppose not … Tandy, I saw the dresser and the little chair and
the tablecloth. They’re lovely. Tandy, did someone iron the tablecloth
for you?”

“Oh, it irons itself,” said Tandy. “You wash it an’ rinse it and stick
it on a window an’ when it’s dry it’s ironed.”

“What’s that lovely white floor?”

Tandy selected and hefted a stone, then carefully laid it on the course.
“Borax,” she said.

“And you bought that with your ice-cream money too?”

“Sure. Brownies like borax and the little lumps off roots and that stuff
there.” She pointed to the rows of dark green weed.

“What is that?”

“The brownie’s farm.”

“I mean, the plant.”

“I don’t know what the real name is. I found it through the woods there,
there’s a whole patch. I call it brownie spinach. Look, over there’s the
lumps. It’s like candy to a brownie.” She pointed to a heap of roots,
from some legume or other—the mother couldn’t tell, for the leaves were
gone; but the root-hairs had clusters of the typical nitrogenous
nodules. “Tandy, how on earth do you know so much about brownies?”

Tandy gave her an impish glance. “I guess the same way you know about
little girls.”

The mother laughed. “Oh, but I had little girls of my own!”

Tandy just nodded: “Mm-hm.”

The mother laughed again. When she left Tandy was fitting a
whiskey-bottle—the three-sided “pinch” bottle—full of water, into the
wall she was building, taking infinite pains to have it slant just so.

The mother wasn’t laughing, though, later when she told her husband
about it. As such things occasionally do, these developments had come
about invisibly to him, having shown themselves mostly when he was away
during the day. He listened, frowning thoughtfully, and when the
children were glued to the television set the parents went out to look
at the brownie house. All he said—all he could find to say, over and
over, was: “Well, how about that.”

When they left he snapped off a sprig of the dark green weed and put it
in his pocket.

“And she sets the table every night,” breathed the mother.

After she finished the fieldstone house (even the roof was stone, laid
over the plywood from which the mossy earth had been swept away) Tandy
seemed to abandon the brownie and his house altogether. She went back to
one of her earlier passions, modeling clay, and spent her time
studiously working it. But not ducks, not elephants. She would make
thick rectangular slabs of it, and draw, or score, deeply into it. Some
of the channels she cut were deeper than others, some curved, some
straight but cut with her stylus at an acute angle, so that portions
were undercut. “Looks like a three-dimensional Mondrian,” said the
father one night when the kids were asleep. He worked in a museum and
knew a great many things, and had access to a great many more. That
plant, for example. “It’s _astralagus vetch_,” he told his wife. “And I
knew I’d read something about it somewhere, so I looked it up again.
It’s a pretty ordinary sort of vegetable except for some reason it has a
fantastic appetite for selenium. So much so that proposals have been
made to mine selenium—and you know, that’s that light-sensitive element
they use in TV tubes and photocells and the like—by planting the vetch
where selenium is known to be in the soil, harvesting the whole plant,
burning it and recovering selenium from the ash. All of which is beside
the point—what on earth made the little fuzzhead pick the stuff up and
plant it?”

“Brownies like it,” the mother said, and smiled.

It was the very next morning that Tandy was missing from the breakfast
table.

There was only a small flurry about it; the mother knew just where to
look. The child was busily packing armloads of vetch and tangles of
knobby roots into a hole in the solid front of the brownie house. The
brownie himself sat against the garage, its face turned toward her, its
not-closed, not-open eyes seeming to watch. “I’m sorry, Mommy,” Tandy
said brightly, “but I’m not late for school, am I?”

“No, dear, but your breakfast is ready. What on earth are you doing to
the brownie’s house?”

“It isn’t a house any more,” said Tandy, in the tones of one explaining
the self-evident to one who should know better without asking, “it’s a
factory.” She put both hands in the hole and pushed hard. Apparently the
house was baled full of weeds and roots. She daubed mortar around the
opening quickly.

“Come, dear.”

“Just finished, Mommy.” She took a flat stone and set it into the
opening, which must have been prepared for it, for it seemed a perfect
fit. Another slap of mortar and she was up smiling. “I’m sorry, Mommy,
but this is the day I had to do that.”

“For the brownie.”

“For the brownie.” They went back to the house.

In Hawaii, a specialist, who should have been but was not more than a
sergeant at the missile tracking station, grunted and straightened away
from the high definition screen. “Lost it.” He pulled a tablet toward
him, glanced at the clock, and started filling in the log.

Nobody saw the faint swift streak as the satellite died. But if there
had been a witness to that death—placed not to see faint swift streaks,
but right on the scene, with a high-speed stroboscopic viewing device,
he would have had some remarkable pictures.

As the golden sphere surrendered to the ravening attack of fractional
heat, in that all but immeasurable fragment of time wherein parts became
malleable, plastic, useful—they were used. Selenium from the solar
cells, nitrogen from the pressurized interior, boro-silicates ripped
from refractory parts, were gleaned and garnered and formed and
conformed. For a brief time (but quite long enough) there existed a
device of molten alloy bars and threads surrounding a throat, or gate,
which was composed of a pulsing, brilliant blue non-substance.

Anything placed within this blue area would cease to exist—not destroyed
in any ordinary sense, but utterly eliminated. And the laws of the
universe being what they are, such eliminated matter must reappear
elsewhere. Exactly where, depends of course on circumstances.

That morning the mother was hanging clothes when a flash of light caught
her eye. She put down her clothesbasket and went to the back of the
garage.

The brownie sat with his back to the garage, staring glumly at the
torn-up remnants of his “farm.” The midmorning sunlight, warm and bright
in this clear dry day, struck down through a gap in the trees and poured
itself on and over the pinch bottle, half in and half out of the near
wall of the little house. The colors were, she found by screening her
vision through her eyelashes, lovely and very bright—flame-orange and
white—why, the bottle itself seemed to be alight.

Or was it the inside of the little house?

There was a violent, sudden hiss as the bottle, full of water, popped
its cork and sent a gout of water inside the little stone structure.
Steam rolled up and then disappeared, and she took a pace back from the
sudden wave of heat. Terrified, she began to think of hose, or
extinguisher … the garage, all these trees, the house … and then she saw
that the side of the brownie’s house which adjoined the wooden garage
was fieldstone too. The heat, whatever it was, was contained.

It seemed to diminish a little. Then the glass bottle wavered, softened,
slumped and fell inside. Heat blasted out again and again diminished.

She stepped closer and peered down through the hole left by the bottle.
She could clearly see, lying on the floor of the stone chamber, the clay
slab Tandy had made, with its odd, geometrical system of ditches and
scorings. But they seemed filled with some quivering liquid, which even
as she watched turned from yellow to silver and then dulled to what
could only be called a chalky pewter. The lines and ditches, filled with
this almost-metal, made a sort of screen, but not exactly. It was too
tangled for that. Say an irregular frame about an irregular opening in
the center of the slab. And this center area began to turn blue and then
purple, and then throb in some way she would never be able to describe.
She had to turn her eyes away.

Looking away seemed to snap the thread of fascination with which she had
leashed fear. She fled to the house, dialed the telephone, got her
husband. “Quick,” she said, and stopped to pant, alarming him mightily.
“Come home.”

It was all she could manage. She hung up and sank into a couch. She was
therefore unaware of Noël, who came trotting across the back of the
house and straight and fearlessly behind the garage. She stood for a
while with a red lollipop in her mouth and pink hands behind her,
watching the heat-flickers over the stones, then circled them carefully
to windward and squatted down where she could peer inside. Carefully
then, and much more steadily than even a deft three-year-old might be
expected to move, she reached down with her delicate lollipop and probed
the molten slag.

“Oh, don’t, don’t!” the mother said later back of the garage, as the
father stabbed angrily at the hot stones with a crowbar. “Tandy
might … she might … oh, it’s meant so much to her …”

“I don’t care, I don’t care,” he growled, stabbing and slashing and
ruining. “I don’t like it. Just say it’s about fire, like playing with
matches. We won’t punish her or anything.”

“No?” she said woefully, looking at the ruins.

“And this,” he said, “damn devilish thing.” He scooped up the brownie
and thrust it among the scorching rocks. It flamed up easily. The last
thing to go was the pair of dull eyes. The mother was at last sure they
had been open the whole time. “Just tell her we almost had a fire,”
growled the father.

 … which was the selfsame day Tandy brought back her report card, the
absolutely perfect report card, and the note:

_ … truly the first absolutely perfect report card I have ever made out
in my twenty-eight years of teaching school. The change in Tandy is
quite beyond anything I have ever seen. She is an absolute delight, and
I think it is safe to say that probably she always was; her previous
behavior was, perhaps, a protest against something which she has now
accepted. I shall never be able to express my gratitude to you for
coming in for that talk, nor my admiration of you for your handling of
the child (whatever that was!). It might be gracious of you to say that
perhaps I had something to do with this; I would like to forestall that
compliment. I did nothing special, nothing extra. It is you who have
wrought the most pleasant kind of miracle_.

It was signed by her teacher, and it left them numb. Then the mother
kissed Tandy and exclaimed, “Oh darling, whoever in the world magicked
you!”

Exclamation or no, Tandy took it as a question and answered it directly:
“The brownie.”

There was a heavy silence, and then the mother took Tandy’s hand. “You
have to know about something,” she said, and ungently to the father,
“You come too.”

They went out behind the garage, the woman touching Tandy’s shoulders
with ready mother hands. “There was a fire, honey. It all burned up. The
brownie burned too.”

The father, watching Tandy’s face, which had not changed at the sight of
the ruin (was this that un-seeing you read about, when people in shock
deny to themselves what they see?) said suddenly and hoarsely, “It was
an accident.”

“No, it wasn’t,” Tandy said. She looked at her father and her mother but
they were both looking at their feet. “And anyway _he_ isn’t burned up,
he wasn’t in that fire.”

“He was,” said the father, but she ignored him. “Anyway,” the mother
said, “I’m terribly sorry about your pretty little house, Tandy.”

Tandy poked out her lips briefly. “It wasn’t a house, it was a factory,
I told you,” she said. “And anyway it’s all finished with anyway.”

“You better understand,” said the father doggedly, “that brownie did
burn.”

“You remember. You left him sitting right there,” said the mother.

“Oh,” said Tandy, “_that_ wasn’t a brownie! You can’t see a brownie,
silly. I’ve got the brownie. Don’t you know that? Didn’t you see the
’port card?”

“How did the …” She couldn’t say it.

“It was easy. Any time I got to do something, I think about should I or
not, and if I should, how I should do it; when I think of the right way,
something inside here goes _bwoop-eee!_” (she made a startlingly
electronic sound, the first syllable glissading upward and the second
flat and unmusical, like a “pure” tone) “and I know that’s what I should
do. It’s easy, And that’s the brownie.”

“Inside you.”

“Mm-hm. That dirty old doll, that was just a way to get some fun out of
all that hard work. I couldn’t’ve done it without having some sort of
fun. So I made it easy for brownies to live in this whole world and they
make it easy for me.”

The mother thought about a metallic twisted thing with a purple mystery
atremble in it. It was like looking through a window into a—another
place. Or a door.

“Tandy,” she said, moved as she sometimes was by sheer impulse, “how
many brownies came through the door?”

“Four,” said Tandy blithely, and began to skip. “One for me, one for
Robin, one for Noël and one for the baby. Could I have some juice?”

They walked back to the house. Robin was home. He was giving Noël back
her lollipop and saying “Thank you” the way they always wished he would.
Noël always was a generous child. She had already given the baby a lick.

The analogy of the profit-sharing plan appears as we imagine a
self-satisfied tycoon at his desk and a bright-eyed junior exec
sprinting in bearing mimeographed sheets. “Gosh, J. G., this is that
first look I had at the new plan. You’re doing a lot for your people
here, J. G., a whole lot.” And homiletically the great man inclines his
head, accepting the tribute, and says “A happy worker is a loyal worker,
my boy.” And while bobbing his head, the junior executive is thinking.
“Yeah, and what’s good for the happy workers is good for management, how
about that?”

Yet enlightened and cooperative self-interest is not always to be
sneered at. Ask any symbiote. Whatever it was that bubbled up out of
that blue orifice had been designed simply and solely to adapt a host
fully to its environment, in order to induce that cardinal harmony
called joy.

Not satisfaction, not contentment, not pleasure. These can be had in
other ways, and by using less than all of the environment. A surge of
joy within the host created that special substance on which the symbiote
fed, and it was as simple as that. Oh happy worker. Oh happy
management …

“Well, thank God anyway she’s back to normal,” said the father. He came
in from the porch where he and the mother had stood watching the
neighborhood kids and Robin and Tandy playing on the lawn. The mother
did not point out to him that Tandy, in and of the whole group now, may
have been playing normally, but she wasn’t back to it; she’d come to it.
The mother stood watching, silent, happy, and frightened.

Inside, the father picked up his newspaper and threw it down again when
he heard one of those special in-group code sounds which come to
families like secret ciphers. This one was the click of heavy glass
against hardwood, and meant that the baby, who had been put down in the
crib in the master bedroom, had lashed out with a strong left hook in
his random way and belted his bottle out of his mouth and up against the
crib bars.

The father stopped just inside the bedroom. His jaw dropped, and all he
could do was slowly to raise a hand to his chin and close it and hold it
closed. For the baby, the six-months-old Timothy, who only yesterday
could hopelessly lose a bottle five-eighths of an inch away from his
hungry face, pulled himself to a sitting position by the bars,
half-turned to the left and pulled the pillow on which the bottle had
been perched away from the side of the crib and up to a formal position
across the end of the mattress; half-turned to the right to grasp the
bottle, then lay back.

He not only took the bottle firmly in his two hands; he not only got his
mouth on it; he also elevated it so it would flow freely.

And for a long moment there was no sound but his suckings, his rhythmic
murmurs of sheer joy, and the faint susurrus of tiny bubbles valving
back into the bottle; for the father was holding his breath. At last the
father inhaled and opened his mouth to call his wife witness to this
miracle. He then thought better of it, closed his mouth, wagged his head
and quietly left the room.

As he entered by one door, Robin, the firstborn, bounded in at the
front. The screen door went to the stretch, and uncorked a curve that
promised to tear out the moldings when it hit. The father squinched up
his face and eyes in preparation for the crash, but Robin, for the first
time in his life—a boy has to be at least eleven before he stops
slamming screen-doors, and Robin was only eight—Robin reached behind him
without looking and buffered the door with his fingertips, so it closed
with a whisper and a click. He galloped past the unthunderstruck father
and went into the kitchen; a moment later he was seen, all unbidden,
lugging the garbage out.

The father fell weakly back into the big wicker chair.

“Daddy …”

He put down his paper. Noël came to him with a long cardboard box
stretching her three-year-old arms out almost straight. She pleaded,
“You wanna play chest with me?”

He looked at her for a long moment. Many times they had sat on the
carpet and made soldier-parades with the chessmen. But now he—he …

He shuddered. He tried to control it but he couldn’t. “No, Noël,” he
said. “I don’t want to play chest with you …” But oh, that’s Noël’s
story, not Tandy’s.



STORY NOTES


By Paul Williams

“A CRIME FOR LLEWELLYN”: first published in _Mike Shayne Mystery
Magazine_, October 1957. Probably written spring or summer 1957. In
August 1957, in a proposal sent to Doubleday editor Walter Bradbury
describing the stories that could be included in a new Sturgeon
collection (A _Touch of Strange)_ he hoped Doubleday would publish, TS
said of this story: _In spite of its title and its berth_ [the magazine
it was already scheduled to be published in], _it is not a crime or
mystery story in the usual sense; call it rather an off-trail, straight
fiction story_.

In chapter 7 (“Art and Artistry”) of her 1981 book/monograph _Theodore
Sturgeon_, Lucy Menger identifies a subcategory of Sturgeon’s writing as
“his portrait stories,” and says, “In these, the protagonist’s
subjective experience provides the framework and tone for the
narrative.” She cites as examples “Scars,” “A Way Home,” “Bright
Segment,” “Bulkhead,” “And Now the News,” “To Here and the Easel,” “The
Man Who Lost the Sea,” and “It’s You!” Menger writes, “Sturgeon’s
portrait stories are the most powerful and moving of his works. Only one
of these tales [‘Bulkhead’] is also science fiction.… These portrait
stories show what the author can do when not constrained by the
strictures of speculative fiction.”

After a brief discussion of how plot functions in speculative fiction
(science fiction), Menger writes: “In most other types of fiction, both
genre and mainstream, human character is the basis of plot. A plot may
involve conflicts between humans or between one or more humans and
circumstances, or within a human, etc., but in every instance, the plot
explores the ramifications of the human character. This is what
Sturgeon’s portrait stories do. They are journeys of discovery into man
himself.

“These journeys follow many paths,” Menger continues. “Two of Sturgeon’s
portrait stories, ‘How to Kill Aunty’ and ‘A Crime for Llewellyn,’
involve crimes. In this pair, however, as in life, the crime is only a
symptom. In ‘A Crime for Llewellyn,’ the subject is the problems of a
human who, like the protagonist in ‘Bright Segment,’ can only marginally
cope.”

“IT OPENS THE SKY”: first published in _Venture Science Fiction_,
November 1957. In his 8/13/57 proposal for Doubleday, TS described this
one as _written only a few days ago and too new for evaluation. It’s
space opera cum personal regeneration_.

Interesting that years before writing “Tandy’s Story,” Sturgeon used his
three-year-old daughter’s name as the name of his attractive, idealistic
teenage heroine in this space adventure about moral values.

“A TOUCH OF STRANGE”: first published in _The Magazine of Fantasy and
Science Fiction_, January 1958. In the 8/13/57 proposal, Sturgeon said
of this: _Contemporary sci-fantasy. Sold only a few days ago to_ Fantasy
& Science Fiction.

TS, in his introduction to a 1982 book called _The Eureka Years, Boucher
and McComas’s The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction 1949–1954_,
without identifying this story by name, talked about his nervous
reaction to “A Touch of Strange” when he first read it: _I shall close
with what, to me, is the definitive Boucher anecdote_.

_The editors had asked me for a story, and had, in time, pressed a
little by telling me there was a spot for it in the upcoming issue, but
it had to be in by such-and-such. Finding just the right story to tell
wasn’t easy, and the calendar and then the clock began to run awfully
fast, and finally I sat down with my head as blank as the paper and
started to put out words more or less at random, until some thirty
sleepless, eatless, even coffee-less hours had gone by. Somehow I got it
into the mail and then fell over sidewise. In due course I convalesced,
and sat down to read my carbon_.

_I was horrified. I felt that I had violated one of the most cardinal
edicts of story. I felt that the manuscript was too long, the story too
thin, and the whole thing totally unprofessional and unworthy of the
magazine_.

_I tottered to the typewriter and banged out (as I remember) five
single-spaced pages saying all the above in much greater detail, begging
the editors to fill my slot with someone else’s story, pleading for
advice as to how to fix this one if it could be fixed, or giving me some
sort of plot or idea or springboard for another story that I could get
out in the next four weeks before deadline. All but weeping, I fired
this moany missive off to California_ [where Boucher lived].

_By return mail I got the only airmail, special delivery_ post card _I
have ever seen. It read:_

_Dear Ted:_

   _I love you_.

_You write such beautiful stories._

      _Tony_

Editor’s introduction to this story (above the title) in the original
magazine appearance: “A reviewer can’t win for losing. If he doesn’t
write, the reviewed will exclaim, ‘Who’s he to talk? He’s not a writer.’
And if he _is_ a writer, they’ll say, ‘Who’s he to talk? Look at his own
stuff!’ The book reviewer of _Venture Science Fiction_ is at least safer
than most in this respect; for Theodore Sturgeon’s own stuff is, as a
rule, just about the best science-fantasy being written today. I hope
that reviewing remains only an avocation with him: the shrewdest
criticism ever achieved in s.f. would be small repayment for the loss of
such stories as this one, with a title that could fit the _Collected
Works_ of Sturgeon.” The story did indeed give its title to Sturgeon’s
fifth story collection, _A Touch of Strange_ (Doubleday, 1958).

“THE COMEDIAN’S CHILDREN”: first published in _Venture Science Fiction_,
May 1958. The comedian protagonist (or antagonist) of this story, Heri
Gonza, was of course inspired by Sturgeon watching Jerry Lewis conduct
early versions of his fund-raising “telethons” for the Muscular
Dystrophy Association and children with neuromuscular diseases.

I’d like to mention that Gonza in this story joins a short list of very
memorable and hate-inspiring villains in Sturgeon stories, including the
narrator of “When You’re Smiling” and Costello in “Mr. Costello, Hero”
and the Maneater in _The Dreaming Jewels_. These characters, like Gonza,
have an unusual power over their fellow men that can be described as
“charm” and that seems characteristic of the modern psychological
archetype known as the psychopath or sociopath.

I’d also like to quote myself. In a biographical profile called
“Theodore Sturgeon” in _The Berkley Showcase, Vol. 3_ (1981), I wrote:
“ ‘The Comedian’s Children,’ about a manipulative TV personality, was
another impossible triumph—that story tore me into little pieces when I
was twelve years old, and it remains one of the most powerful pieces of
fiction I’ve ever read.”

“THE GRAVEYARD READER”: first published in an anthology edited by Groff
Conklin called _The Graveyard Reader_ and published by Ballantine Books
in 1958.

_In 1958 one of my dearest friends, the late Groff Conklin, sent me a
permission form to enable him to include a story of mine in a new
anthology, as he did for almost every one of the many anthologies he
produced. I forget what story he asked for, but I recall thinking that
it wasn’t suitable altogether for this book, which was to be called_ The
Graveyard Reader. _In a rush of gratitude for the many kindnesses that
remarkable man had done for me, I sat down and wrote him an original
story with the same title as his book. I wrote it without getting up
from the typewriter, and gave it to him. I mean, I really gave it,
asking him not to send me a check, an offer which he subsequently and
forcefully refused, though he cried when he read it. Just by the way,
the first time I read it in public, I did too. And it wasn’t until I
began compiling this special book [Maturity_, 1979; this quote is from
the introduction to that collection] _that it came to me that this story
expresses a highly refined aspect of maturity that isn’t even hinted at
in the two preceding it_ [“Maturity” and “Bulkhead”]: _Words are by no
means the best means of communication, and they need all the help they
can get_.

“THE MAN WHO TOLD LIES”: first published in _The Magazine of Fantasy and
Science Fiction_, September 1959, under the pseudonym “Billy Watson” as
part of a feature called “Quintet.” “Quintet” consisted of three
short-short stories and two poems, all credited to names unfamiliar to
the magazine’s readers. The editor’s introduction to the feature read as
follows:

“The imaginative eye of a child sees without the blinders of culture and
sophistication, and the result, in the case of a truly creative child,
is a fresh and different kind of art which an adult cannot easily
duplicate.… Or can he? That is the question at hand. At least one of the
following pieces was written by a child under 12; at least one was
written by either Damon Knight, Jane Rice, Theodore Sturgeon, or Alfred
Bester—all of whom are, shall we say, over 35. All of the pieces are, we
think, worth reading on any grounds; we offer the additional piquancy of
asking you to guess which of the following bylines are the actual names
of creative children, and which hide the identities of professional
writers. To give you adequate time to think about it, we withhold the
answers till next month.”

“THE MAN WHO LOST THE SEA”: first published in _The Magazine of Fantasy
and Science Fiction_, October 1959.

In his introduction to “The Man Who Lost the Sea” in the 1979 collection
_The Golden Helix_, Sturgeon wrote:

_In 1959 I left for the West Indies seeking a balmy climate and a
low-rent district. For the first time in my life I worked eight hours a
day, seven days a week on a regular schedule. And in practically every
way it turned into a disaster. I just couldn’t make a story jell. I
finally got going on a space-travel story and ground out words, one
after the other, until I had a start, a middle, a finish. It was
awful—wordy and slow and muzzy_.

_So literally for months I cut. I cut until the story and I bled. I cut
it from 21,000 words down to 5,000, and at last called it finished. I
showed it to my wife and she couldn’t understand it. I showed it to my
mother, who was alive at the time, and she couldn’t understand it. I had
completely lost perspective on it, and I returned to the States, bloody
and very much bowed_.

_Shortly afterward Bob Mills called and wanted a story for an All-Star
issue of_ F&SF. _I told him that all I had was this, but that if I sent
it, I never wanted to see it again. I did, and he read it, and called
back to say it was okay, he guessed_—but it needed cutting!

_I guess I got a little hysterical I told him to burn it. But he bought
it, and ran it, and it wound up in that year’s Martha Foley Award
Anthology as one of the best short stories of the year. Moral: Don’t
believe what everybody tells you, even if everybody is your mother_.

“The Man Who Lost the Sea” did in fact get selected for Martha Foley’s
prestigious annual anthology _Best American Short Stories_, possibly the
first time a story first published in a science fiction magazine was
awarded that honor. And it is described as “perhaps his most-praised
story” on the back of the year 2000 Vintage Books Sturgeon collection,
_Selected Stories_.

On March 31, 1959, Sturgeon mailed “The Man Who Lost the Sea” to his New
York literary agent from Grenada Island accompanied by a letter that
began: _Here at last is the story on which I have worked so hard for so
long—longer, as a consecutive effort, than anything else I have ever
written. It has been profoundly researched: if anyone ever wants to
know, I will supply a formidable bibliography. Everything in it, the
landscape, the sky phenomena, the ship design, the suit, the sickness,
even the special kind of in-shock mental aberration suffered by the
protagonist, is in accord with the best references I have or can lay my
hands on_.

_Yet I am profoundly discouraged with it. What I have been trying to
do—what has taken me so long—is to hit the top slick markets with a kind
of s-f which is truly scientific, but not the ultra-ultra of wild
distant worlds and phantastic beasties. What I want is the future of the
day after tomorrow, clearly linked to today’s headlines. I see clearly
that I ought not to change my style or approach, but simply go on with
what I’ve done all along, if only because Ray Russell [of_ Playboy],
_among others, is willing to list already published stuff as items he
would have bought, as is. But I have been unable to do this, since I
regard my association with you as a profound break with all that has
gone before, and a new career in new places. Perhaps I should go back to
the same as before, and rely on you to throw it high and let it find its
own level. Maybe you’ll have a word of advice for me on this_.

_To be specific, I feel that in this story I have aimed at a market
which requires less “science,” not more: more direct, simple-minded
clarity, not less. But what I’ve produced is an elaborate switching of
points-of-view, tense, and locale, self-consciously “skillful” to the
point of obscuration_.

_I’d like to rewrite it and will if you say so: and I’ll do it quickly,
by the way—don’t worry about that! I have it all blocked out. I think
the very worst fault of this version is similar to that I detected in
“Ride In, Ride Out”_ [a not-yet-published Sturgeon/Ward story]—_a
protagonist who does virtually nothing, but lounges along letting things
happen to him. I think in the rewrite this problem of the “sick man”
should be a fight, a battle every inch of the way, until at the end, he
wins. He still dies, but he wins his particular battle, which is to
figure out where he is—an act which is obscured to him, in his sickness,
by his subconscious mind’s unwillingness to face the fact that he is not
only dying but more alone than anyone has ever been before. So bit by
bit, piece by piece, he gathers the evidence before him until he has the
truth, then transcends it in his triumphant last line. So that instead
of the current, supine waiting for it all to clear up for him, he_ makes
_it clear up—surely the essence of good narrative_.

“The Man Who Lost the Sea” was nominated for a Hugo Award for best
science fiction short story of the year 1959.

In her discussion of “portrait stories” (mentioned above in the note to
“A Crime for Llewellyn”), Lucy Menger wrote: “Despite an exotic locale,
‘The Man Who Lost the Sea’ is not, by Sturgeon’s own definition _[A good
science fiction story is a story with a human problem, and a human
solution, which would not have happened at all without its science
content]_, science fiction because its scientific elements could be
replaced by relative commonplaces. Told in an unusual manner, it is the
drama of a man becoming aware of his own circumstances and realizing
that his defeat is only one facet of a larger victory.” Menger notes
that the Sturgeon definition she quotes is from page 10 of a 1962 book
edited by Damon Knight called _A Century of Science Fiction_.

Sturgeon’s daughter Noël has said, “one of the things that has always
struck me about this story is how it turned out, eerily, to be a
description of how he [TS] died, slowly losing the ability to breathe.”

“THE MAN WHO FIGURED EVERYTHING” by Theodore Sturgeon and Don Ward;
first published in _Ellery Queen’s Mystery Magazine_, January 1960.

Editor’s introduction to this story from the original magazine
appearance:

“An unorthodox Western detective story—unorthodox because it not only
breaks the rules of Westerns but of crime fiction as well. As a matter
of fact, the authors, messrs. Sturgeon and Ward, deliberately set out to
write a Western that departed from tradition and formula—and they
succeeded.

“So meet Arch Scott, a Western law man, and the Badlands Bookkeeper, a
Western bad man, who play their usual roles in unusual ways …”

TS in 1956 described the process of collaboration between himself and
Ward: _Don dreams ’em up and I write ’em my way and submit them without
his seeing them_. Ward in his introduction to their 1973 collection,
_Sturgeon’s West_, described the collaboration as “my contribution
minor, his major.”

“LIKE YOUNG”: first published in _The Magazine of Fantasy and Science
Fiction_, March 1960.

There is a half-page, 19 single-spaced lines, typed note among
Sturgeon’s papers found at his former home in Woodstock, that is clearly
the genesis not just of this story’s idea but of some of its language:
_They called us the Immune, but that was a misnomer. We’d all had it.
It’s just that we hadn’t died of it. Mankind was dead; we weren’t, just
yet_.

_Humanity wasn’t.… I guess these things are open to definition. There
were six hundred and four of us left alive, and we’d all grown up to a
long lifetime devoted to the single idea of seeing to it that with
mankind dead, humanity would survive—humanity in the sense of
aspiration, generosity—if you like, nobility_.

_We were going to give it to the otters_.

_Ever since the first man observed with delight the playfulness of the
otters, ever since they had been seen using tools—the sea otter always
has, you know, floating on his back, bracing a shellfish against his
chest, cracking it with a stone—the evidence had been before us that the
Otters were the next Ones. Adaptable, intelligent, humorful in the way
that only humans had been humorful, continuing it all their lives, while
other species got grim at adulthood—wonderfully able to survive in
arctic or tropics, highland and low—it had always been obvious that the
otters would be Next_.

_Experiments in accelerating their development were made, of course, but
without success except in the extrapolative, statistical sense; it
became obvious that they would advance to civilized status, but not in
our lifetimes_.

When the narrator says, near the middle of this story, _“For our kind to
end with a whimper … this was Bad Art”_ I hear echoes of these lines
from the closing pages of Sturgeon’s first novel, _The Dreaming Jewels:
She has given her life for an alien caste … It might be that “justice”
and “mercy” are relative terms; but nothing can alter the fact that her
death, upon earning her right to survive, is bad art_. I asked Sturgeon
about these lines in 1978 when I was writing an introduction for a
reprint of that novel. He told me: _I think I derived that from an early
Heinlein story, which one I don’t remember. where a real nuts-and-bolts
engineering type was asked if he believed in life after death, and he
said immediately and without hesitation, of course I do. And this girl
was really astonished and says, why is that? And he says “It has to be
that way, otherwise it would be bad art.” That impressed me
tremendously, it really did_.

“NIGHT RIDE”: first published in _Keyhole Mystery Magazine_, June 1960.
Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine appearance:
THE RUNAWAY BUS WAS CARRYING A STRANGE GROUP ON ITS ONE-WAY PLUNGE TO
DOOM. THERE WERE 32 LIVE PASSENGERS—AND ONE CORPSE!

“NEED”: first published in the Sturgeon collection _Beyond_ (Avon
paperbacks, July 1960).

“Need” was nominated for a Hugo Award for best science fiction novelette
of the year 1960.

In a letter to Damon Knight dated Nov. 13, 1959, TS wrote: _I sold a new
book to Avon in the summer. They wouldn’t play unless I promised a new
novelette to go with it. I get $750 if I send them 10–15M_ [10 to 15
thousand words]. _I can’t write the 10–15M_. [This in the context of
describing a bout of writer’s block that had started in the West
Indies.] This letter to Knight is also interesting for a paragraph in
which he reports his recollection of how long it took him to write
certain stories and novels that he wrote relatively quickly (and easily)
as opposed to the long struggle he was having with “Need”: _I wrote
“Saucer of Loneliness” in four hours, “The Pod in the Barrier” in one
day, “Drusilla Strange” in three, “Killdozer!” in nine_, I, Libertine
_in 22_. More than Human _took five weeks total_.

There are ten pages of “maundering” notes among Sturgeon’s papers,
trying to develop this story idea, several of them headed “Gorwing.” The
following passages (from one single-spaced sheet of typing) suggest that
TS had already written the opening scene (or had pictured it, thought
about it) and was using that plus presumably a basic idea of a story
about a guy (Gorwing) who has a telepathic ability (and, sometimes,
curse) to be aware of people in need and of what they seem to be feeling
a need for:

_It seems to me that perhaps the best narrator is the first (taxi)
victim. This guy is really burning at being taken this way; yet
overriding that is a growing curiosity as to how the hell Gorwing did
it. He goes to work on the one weak link—Noat. What happens when the
plug-ugly is treated well, covered for his boss, treated as a real human
being with real problems? Perhaps he’s always been underprivileged and
warms to this. GLIMMERING of a sequence where Smith almost learns the
trick, walking about under the stars and sensing the crying, yearning,
hungry hopeful masses around him … but my Machine won’t produce this
until it has a clear Build to the yarn … Hm … THIS MUST BE TRUE: If I
keep whanging away at this plot it will yield. And then—think of it! All
I’ll have to do then is to write what moves me, about anyone,
anywhere—and the hell with sf & f … I wonder if I could write the
Sylvana story in a week once the draft is done? I bet I could. And oh
then the lovely money … GALAXY and then Doubleday or Farrar, Strauss,
and later, Gold Medal or Dell … but I can’t do any of that until this
ruddy Avon chore is done with … so let’s go: Gorwing has a talent.
Marvelous as it is, it profits him little because too seldom does anyone
close enough need anything he has to offer. He enlists the aid of a mass
of muscles nzmed George Noat, known as G-note. One episode has to do
with $100 asked demanded for a one-way ride from Nyack to Congers,
victim, one Smith. With this as the basis, get right to work and build a
good reader-identification plot_.

_Character is the key. Plot springs from character. I have a “talented”
but rather frantic and insecure Gorwing, a big good-natured physically
ugly ape, Noat, and Smith, who could be anybody … would I be in too much
of a pocket if I just started out with the taxi incident and went on
from there? … Noat narrating: I was in front of the pool hall when
Gorwing pulled up in his Dodge. Do you want to make a big buck? I said
sure. So I got in and he tore off. All he told me was to keep my eyes
open, especially the ears, and my mouth shut. We pulled up by the
traffic light on 9W and there was this anxious-looking guy pacing it on
the road. Gorwing says, “Taxi, mister?” and laughs a dirty laugh. The
guy jumps in and Gorwing pulls right over to the side and shuts the
motor off. The guy gets frantic. Gorwing puts it to him: how much? The
guy says, whatever you say, but get going. Gorwing says, I say a
hundred. The guy screams. Gorwing opens the door. The guy closes it and
says drive then. We go to Congers, the guy fires out into a house.
Gorwing starts to lean on the horn. The guy comes out with a twenty and
says push off. Gorwing turns the flashlight on my face and says G-Note
here will collect in the morning. Then I begin to haunt the house.
Pretty soon the guy stops being tough at me and begins to be nice. I
fall for it and finally settle for Gorwing’s cut: Gorwing never knows
the difference. But after that I see a lot of this Smith_.

_G-Note could be a charming character who believes everything anyone
tells him and has an alarming ability to rationalize the irreductible.
He believes Gorwing and then he believes Smith, and in his own mind sees
nothing difficult about believing both. Keep it in mind but don’t make
it signal_.

_Wonder if I’m overlooking my Woodford after all these years. Seven
elements: Problem, character, obstacle, complication, crisis, climax,
denouement. BOY that was a meaty thought! Do you mean after all these
years I got plot trouble? That’s it, tho’—at least as far as this beast
is concerned. Because tho’ I have characters, my Noat is only an
observer, Smith a motivator, and really, only Gorwing has a problem—and
that’s not much of a problem; it’s only that of making a living like the
rest of us … which may be the crucial thing here after all. How about a
domestic picture of Gorwing in trouble—his story after all—in why he
pulls Noat into it. At first seeming hard, taciturn, unsympathetic, he
is revealed as a guy crying inside with the clamor of demand on him: for
his own survival he_ can’t _sympathize with anyone … the undertone of
the story, then, can be a study of values. He has to get liquor, say,
for an alcoholic wife whom he really loves_ … _or food for the baby, for
that matter_ … _and in the course of the story, he does. The big switch
is in the reader’s re-estimate of him, which he shares with Smith_.…
_Maybe Smith is looking for a hard guy and in a way appreciates this
ploy_ … _or Noat could wander through the story in his dim way trying to
show each what a nice guy the other is_ …

This is quite a portrait of an author getting ready to let a story come
through him. Interesting that he says, early on: _my Machine won’t
produce this until it has a clear Build to the yarn_, as though his
experience is that there is a mechanism inside him that seems to write
the stories itself once he gives it sufficient fodder and momentum. The
comment _All I’ll have to do then is to write what moves me_ … _and the
hell with sf & f_ … suggests that the editor at Avon has let him know
that this new story for the book didn’t have to be science fiction or
fantasy (perhaps the editor was aware of what a valuable addition
“Bright Segment” was to _Caviar_, without being sf or fantasy).

The line in the above “maundering” _Wonder if I’m overlooking my
Woodford after all these years_ is of much interest to students of
Sturgeon’s work. Jack Woodford’s first book on writing, _Trial and
Error: A Key to the Secret of Writing and Selling_ was published in
1933, five years before Sturgeon began writing professionally. It seems
possible that the “Woodford” Sturgeon is referring to here (indicating
clearly that he’s studied and practiced Woodford’s guidelines in past
years) is Woodford’s 1939 book _PLOTTING: How to Have a Brain Child_.

“HOW TO KILL AUNTY”: first published in _Mike Shayne Mystery Magazine_,
March 1961. Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine
appearance (where the story was titled “How to Kill Your Aunty”;
Sturgeon changed the title when the story was included in his 1966
collection _Starshine):_ A CAT MAY PLAY WITH A MOUSE A LONG TIME BEFORE
KILLING IT. AND MURDER IS CAT PLAY TO SOME. Below this blurb and under
the author’s name atop the story was this line: A MYSTERY NOVELET OF
DARK VIOLENCE

As mentioned above in the note to “A Crime for Llewellyn,” Lucy Menger
in her book _Theodore Sturgeon_ describes “How to Kill Aunty” as one of
Sturgeon’s “portrait stories,” “journeys of discovery into man himself.”

In 1962, this story was included in Brett Halliday’s annual collection
_Best Detective Stories of the Year_.

“TANDY’S STORY”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_, April
1961. Editor’s blurb above the title from the first page of the original
magazine appearance: BORAX FOR BROWNIES AND THE MOONWATCHER WHO
MISSED—THE CRINKLED GETTER AND THE CANAVERAL SNEEZE—THESE ARE THE THINGS
THAT MAKE UP—

In his introduction to “Tandy’s Story” in the 1979 collection _The Stars
Are the Styx_, Sturgeon wrote:

_One is conditioned to be austere and objective—I don’t know why, or who
started it; somehow it’s not supposed to be “appropriate” (a word I hate
a lot) to bring oneself and one’s bloodstream into public view_.

_Well, I say the hell with it. Most of what I write is written by the
simple process of opening a vein and dripping it (all too slowly) into
the typewriter. My research has always been people, and more often than
not, it’s the people closest to me that I can research most
conveniently. And the process of compiling such a collection as this
must of necessity bring a sharp focus on the environment in which they
are written_.

_Tandy’s Story was designed to be the first in a series, ultimately to
be collected as a book of short stories and novelettes, to be called_
The Family. _There would be this, and Noël’s, and Timothy’s (he’s the
baby mentioned in these pages) and Robin’s, and then_ The Mother’s Story
_and finally_ The Father’s Story.

_But then one of those great winds that sweep across our biographies
arose, and I was separated from these people by some thousands of miles
and days, and here I am a week away from having watched Noël graduate
from college and “the baby” Timothy whack his head against a six-foot
door lintel. Robin has been celebrated elsewhere in my work, and Noël’s
turn is coming some day soon, I’m sure, as is something special for Tim,
but these can’t happen in the same matrix as this one. Nostalgia is
often tinged with regret; mine is not. But at the same time I am
poignantly aware that in a contiguous universe there is a volume called_
The Family _which will not and cannot be written. I’d like to read it_.

In the December 1962 issue of a science fiction writers’ journal called
_PITFCS (Proceedings of the Institute for Twenty-First Century Sudies)_,
Frederik Pohl, Horace Gold’s successor as editor of _Galaxy_, wrote,
“One of the best stories Horace ever bought—the last he worked on before
he had to give up and go to the hospital—was Theodore Sturgeon’s
“Tandy’s Story.” I know for a fact that he converted it from a passable
bit into an excellent job by demanding and getting considerable
revision.”

“Tandy’s Story” is included in _The Norton Book of Science Fiction:
North American Science Fiction, 1960–1990_, edited by Ursula K. Le Guin
and Brian Attebery.

FURTHER BIBLIOGRAPHIC AND BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

During the time when Sturgeon wrote the stories included in this volume,
mid-1957 to the end of 1960, he published five books, and lived in four
different towns in several different parts of the world. _A Touch of
Strange_ (August 1958) was a hardcover collection of nine stories, three
of which are included in this volume of _The Complete Stories of
Theodore Sturgeon_.

_The Cosmic Rape_ was a novel, published as an original paperback in
August 1958, four years after Sturgeon had contracted to write it and
had indicated that he could produce it quickly; the delay led his editor
to remark to a mutual acquaintance, Judith Merril: “I know Sturgeon can
write a novel in three days, but _which three days?”_ The August 1958
issue of _Galaxy_ included a short novel by Sturgeon called “To Marry
Medusa,” which is actually a condensed or edited-down version of _The
Cosmic Rape_, probably prepared by the magazine’s editor. I have not
chosen to include “To Marry Medusa” in _The Complete Stories of Theodore
Sturgeon_ because I believe it is not a story but a shortened version of
an already completed novel, possibly put together by someone other than
Sturgeon.

In 1959, Sturgeon published a new paperback collection called _Aliens
4_, made up of four short novels: “The Comedian’s Children,”
“Killdozer!” (slightly revised), “Cactus Dance,” and “The [Widget], The
[Wadget], and Boff.”

In September 1960, Sturgeon published an original paperback novel called
_Venus Plus X_. In July 1960, he published a new paperback collection
called _Beyond_, which included “Need” and “Like Young.”

For the first part of 1957, Theodore and Marion Sturgeon and their
children Robin, Tandy and Noël continued to live in Congers in Rockland
County, New York, just northwest of New York City. Sometime in the
second half of 1957, the Sturgeons moved to a house in Truro,
Massachusetts, near the tip of Cape Cod. “The Comedian’s Children” and
much of _The Cosmic Rape_ were probably written in Truro.

“But the Cape was cold and lonely,” I wrote in my biographical profile
(published in 1981 in _The Berkley Showcase, vol. 3_ and currently
available online at the Sturgeon Literary Trust page whose address is in
the Editor’s Note at the front of this volume), “and the Sturgeon family
decided they could live cheaper and happier in the West Indies. Ted’s
mother was teaching on St. Vincent, and she found them a place on the
island of Bequi. They arrived and the house was too small, noisy, no
privacy … so they began months of island-hopping, searching for a home.
They ended up on Grenada. Ted had no place to write during all this, but
he kept trying. He was working on a story called ‘The Man Who Lost the
Sea.’ ”

In mid-1959 the Sturgeons left the West Indies and returned to New York
state, eventually settling in the “artists’ colony” town of Woodstock,
where they would live happily for the next six or seven years.

CORRECTIONS AND ADDENDA

Series reader Jim Wilson has found and kindly supplied us with a further
comment by Sturgeon on “A Saucer of Loneliness” (volume VII). This is
from a 1968 paperback anthology edited by Robert P. Mills, called _The
Worlds of Science Fiction_, in which authors were asked to choose their
personal favorite among their stories and to write a brief rubric
explaining why they chose that particular story. TS wrote:

_“Not one writer in twenty thousand,” a knowledgeable agent once told
me, “is competent to judge his own product.” This may well be true;
could I judge him and his sweeping statements? Be that as it may, I have
good and sufficient reasons for my special fondness for “Saucer.” It was
written in about four hours, one of those profoundly satisfying
creations, which simply lays itself out, word after word, “feeling”
right all the way. In addition, it is one of the stories which bears out
something that I have been formulating for some time; that good science
fiction is good to the extent that it is fable; that is, stories about
foxes and grapes are not dubious accounts of improbably herbivorous
foxes impossibly making spoken conclusions; they mean other things in
other contexts. As such, “Saucer” is a fable, an explication of that
endemic disease called loneliness. Finally, the story pleases me with
its opening; few things I have ever done have so exploded onto the
page_.

[]
