{11252010331033{} 41432024 THE LUCKY STARR SERIES by Isaac AsimovDavid
Starr: Space RangerLucky Starr and the Pirates of the AsteroidsLucky
Starr and the Oceans of VenusLucky Starr and the Big Sun of MercuryLucky
Starr and the Moons of JupiterLucky Starr and the Rings of SaturnLucky
Starrand thePirates of the Asteroidsby Isaac AsimovLucky Starr and the
Pirates of the AsteroidsCopyright 1953 by Doubleday & Co., Inc.All
rights reserved.This edition published in 1978 by Gregg PressA Division
of G. K. Hall & Co.by arrangement with Doubleday & Co., Inc.and with the
cooperation of Isaac AsimovJacket and frontmatter art by Wayne Barlowe
Jacket and frontmatter design by John BaltaPrinted on permanent/durable
acid-free paper and bound in the United States of AmericaFirst Printing,
October 197H0Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication DataAsimov,
Isaac, 1920-Lucky Starr and the pirates of the asteroids.(The Lucky
Starr series)Reprint of the 1st ed. published by Doubleday, Garden City,
N. Y.I. Title. II. Series.PZ3.A8316Lu 1978 [PS3551.S5] 813'.5'4 78-13135
ISBN 0-8398-2487-4PREFACEBack in the 1950s, I wrote a series of six
derring-do novels about David "Lucky" Starr and his battles against
malefactors within the Solar System. Each of the six took place in a
different region of the system and in each case I made use of the
astonomical facts-as they were then known.Now, a quarter-century later,
Gregg Press is bringing out the novels in new hardcover editions; but
what a quarter-century it has been! More has been learned about the
worlds of our Solar System in this last quarter-century than in all the
thousands of years of earlier observations.Prior to the 1950s, you see,
we could only look from Earth's surface; since then, we have been able
to send out rocket probes to take photographs and make studies at close
range.The only one of the six Lucky Starr novels that has remained
untouched by this-at least so far-is LUCKY STARR AND THE PIRATES OF THE
ASTEROIDS, 0 which was written in 1953. There is evidence that many of
the asteroids may be a little darker and just a little larger than had
been thought earlier, but that makes very little difference.Therefore,
Lucky can fight the pirates and engage in his deadlyVIPrefaceduels right
now just as he did a quarter-century ago, when this book was written. It
I had to write the novel today, I would hardly have to change a
word.isaac asimovDEDICATIONTo Frederik Pohl,That contradiction in
terms-A lovable agent.CONTENTSchapter 1 The Doomed Shipchapter 2 Vermin
of Spacechapter 3 Duel in Wordchapter 4 Duel in Deedchapter 5 The Hermit
on the Rockchapter 6 What the Hermit Knewchapter 7 To Cereschapter 8
Bigman Takes Overchapter 9 The Asteroid That Wasn'tchapter 10 The
Asteroid That Waschapter 11 At Close Quarterschapter 12 Ship versus
Shipchapter 13 Raid!chapter 14 To Ganymede via the Sunchapter 15 Part of
the Answerchapter 16 All of the AnswerCHAPTER 1THE DOOMED SHIPFifteen
minutes to zero time! 0 The Atlas 0 waited to take off. The sleek,
burnished lines of the space-ship glittered in the bright Earthlight
that filled the Moon's night sky. Its blunt prow pointed upward into
empty space. Vacuum surrounded it and the dead pumice of the Moon's
surface was under it. The number of its crew was zero. There wasn't a
living person aboard.432 * _432 Dr. Hector Conway, Chief Councilor of
Science, said, "What time is it, Gus?"He felt uncomfortable in the Moon
offices of the Council. On Earth he would have been at the very top of
the stone and steel needle they called Science Tower. He would have been
able to look out the window toward International City.Here on the Moon
they did their best. The offices had mock windows with brilliantly
designed Earth scenes behind them. They were colored naturally, and
lights within them brightened and softened during the day, simulating
morning, noon, and evening. During the sleep periods they even shone a
dim, dark blue.It wasn't enough, though, for an Earthman like Con-way.
He knew that if he broke through the glass of the windows there would be
only painted miniatures before14 LUCKY STARRhis eyes, and if he got
behind that, then there would be just another room, or maybe the solid
rock of the Moon.Dr. Augustus Henree, whom Conway had addressed, looked
at his wrist. He said, between puffs at his pipe, "There's still fifteen
minutes. There's no point in worrying. The Atlas 0 is in perfect shape.
I checked it myself yesterday.""I know that." Conway's hair was pure
white and he looked older than the lank, thin-faced Henree, though they
were the same age. He said, "It's Lucky I'm worried
about.""Lucky?"Conway smiled sheepishly. "I'm catching the habit, I'm
afraid. I'm talking about David Starr. It's just that everyone calls him
Lucky these days. Haven't you heard them?""Lucky Starr, eh? The name
suits him. But what about him? This is all his idea, after
all.""Exactly. It's the sort of idea he gets. I think he'll tackle the
Sirian Consulate on the Moon next.""I wish he would.""Don't joke.
Sometimes I think you encourage him in his idea that he ought to do
everything as a one-man job. It's why I came here to the Moon, to keep
an eye on him, not to watch the ship.""If that's what you came here for,
Hector, you're not on the job.""Oh well, I can't follow him about like a
mother hen. But Bigman is with him. I told the little fellow I would
skin him alive if Lucky decided to invade the Sirian Consulate
singlehanded."THE DOOMED SHIP 15Henree laughed."I tell you he'd do it,"
grumbled Conway. "What's worse, he'd get away with it, of course.""Well,
then.""It would just encourage him, and then someday he'll take one risk
too many, and he's too valuable a man to lose!"432 _ _432 John Bigman
Jones teetered across the packed clay flooring, carrying his stein of
beer with the utmost care. They didn't extend the pseudo-gravity fields
outside the city itself, so that out here at the space-port you had to
do the best you could under the Moon's own gravity field. Fortunately
John Bigman Jones had been born and bred on Mars, where the gravity was
only two fifths normal anyway, so it wasn't too bad. Bight now he
weighed twenty pounds. On Mars he would have weighed fifty, and on the
Earth one hundred and twenty.He got to the sentry, who had been watching
him with amused eyes. The sentry was dressed in the uniform of the Lunar
National Guard, and he was used to the gravity.John Bigman Jones said,
"Hey. Don't stand there so gloomylike. I brought you a beer. Have it on
me."The sentry looked surprised, then said regretfully, "I can't. Not
when I'm on duty, you know.""Oh well. I can handle it myself, I guess.
I'm John Bigman Jones. Call me Bigman." He only came up to the sentry's
chin and the sentry wasn't particularly tall, but Bigman held out his
hand as though he were reaching down with it.16 LUCKY STARR"I'm Bert
Wilson. You from Mars?" The sentry looked at Bigman's scarlet and
vermilion hip boots. Nobody but a Martian farm boy would let himself be
caught dead in space with them.Bigman looked down at them proudly. "You
bet. I'm stuck here for about a week. Great space, what a rock the Moon
is. Don't any of you guys ever go out on the surface?""Sometimes. When
we have to. There isn't much to see there.""I sure wish I could go. I
hate being cooped up.""There's a surface lock back there."Bigman
followed the thumb that had been jerked back across the sergeant's
shoulder. The corridor (rather poorly lit at this distance from Luna
City) narrowed into a recess in the wall.Bigman said, "I don't have a
suit.""You couldn't go out even if you had one. No one's allowed out
without a special pass for a while.""How come?"Wilson yawned. "They've
got a ship out there that's getting set to go," he looked at his watch,
"in about twelve minutes. Maybe the heat will be off after it's gone. I
don't know the story on it."The sentry rocked on the balls of his feet
and watched the last of the beer drain down Bigman's throat. He said,
"Say, did you get the beer at Patsy's Port Bar? Is it crowded?""It's
empty. Listen, tell you what. It'll take you fifteen seconds to get in
there and have one. I've got nothing toTHE DOOMED SHIP 17do. I'll stay
right here and make sure nothing happens while you're gone."Wilson
looked longingly in the direction of the Port Bar. "I better not.""It's
up to you."Neither one of them, apparently, was conscious of the figure
that drifted past behind them along the corridor and into the recess
where the space-locks huge door barred the way to the surface.Wilson's
feet took him a few steps toward the Bar, as though they were dragging
the rest of him. Then he said, "Nah! I better not."432 _ _432Ten minutes
to zero time.0It had been Lucky Starr's idea. He had been in Con-way's
home office the day the news arrived that the T.S.S. Waltham Zachary 0
had been gutted by pirates, its cargo gone, its officers frozen corpses
in space and most of the men captives. The ship itself had put up a
pitifully futile fight and had been too damaged to be worth the pirate's
salvage. They had taken everything movable though, the instruments, of
course, and even the motors.Lucky said, "It's the asteroid belt that's
the enemy. One hundred thousand rocks.""More than that." Conway spat out
his cigarette. "But what can we do? Ever since the Terrestrial Empire
has been a going concern, the asteroids have been more than we could
handle. A dozen times we've gone in there to clean out nests of them,
and each time we've left enough to breed the troubles again. Twenty-five
years ago, when----"18 LUCKY STARRThe white-haired scientist stopped
short. Twenty-five years ago Lucky's parents had been killed in space
and he himself, a little boy, had been cast adrift.Lucky's calm brown
eyes showed no emotion. He said, "The trouble is we don't even know
where all the asteroids are.""Naturally not. It would take a hundred
ships a hundred years to get the necessary information for the sizable
asteroids. And even then the pull of Jupiter would be forever changing
asteroidal orbits here and there.""We might still try. If we sent out
one ship, the pirates might not know it was an impossible job and fear
the consequences of a real mapping. If the word got out that we had
started a mapping survey, the ship would be attacked.""And then
what?""Suppose we sent out an automatic ship, completely equipped, but
with no human personnel.""It would be an expensive thing to do.""It
might be worth it. Suppose we equipped it with lifeboats automatically
designed to leave the ship when its instruments recorded the energy
pattern of an approaching hyperatomic motor. What do you suppose the
pirates would do?""Shoot the lifeboats into metal drift, board the ship,
and take it to their base.""Or one of their bases. Right. And if they
see the lifeboats try to get away, they won't be surprised at finding no
crew aboard. After all, it would be an unarmed survey ship. You wouldn't
expect the crew to attempt resistance."THE DOOMED SHIP 19"Well, what are
you getting at?""Suppose further that the ship is wired to explode once
its temperature is raised to more than twenty degrees absolute, as it
certainly would if it were brought into an asteroid hangar.""You're
proposing a booby trap, then?""A gigantic one. It would blow an asteroid
apart. It might destroy dozens of pirate ships. Furthermore, the
observatories at Ceres, Vesta, Juno, or Pallas might pick up the flash.
Then, if we could locate surviving pirates, we might get information
that would be very useful indeed.""I see."And so they started work on
the Atlas.0432 _ _0432 The shadowy figure in the recess leading to the
Moon's surface worked with sure quickness. The sealed controls of the
air-lock gave under the needle beam of a micro-heatgun. The shielding
metal disc swung open. Busy, black-gloved fingers flew for a moment.
Then the disc was replaced and fused tightly back by a wider and cooler
beam from the same heatgun.The cave door of the lock yawned. The alarm
that rang routinely whenever it did so was silent this time, its
circuits behind the tampered disc disarranged. The figure entered the
lock and the door closed behind him. Before he opened the surface door
that faced out into the vacuum, he unrolled the pliant plastic he
carried under his arm. He scrambled into it, the material covering him
wholly and clinging to him, broken only by a strip of clear silicone
plastic across his eyes. A small cylinder of20 LUCKY STARRliquid oxygen
was clamped to a short hose that lead to the headpiece and was hooked on
to the belt. It was a semi-space-suit, designed for the quick trip
across an airless surface, not guaranteed to be serviceable for
stretches of more than half an hour.432 _ _432 Bert Wilson, startled,
swiveled his head. "Did you hear that?"Bigman gaped at the sentry. "I
didn't hear anything.""I could swear it was a lock door closing. There
isn't any alarm, though.""Is there supposed to be?""Sure. You've got to
know when one door is open. It's a bell where there's air and a light
where there isn't. Otherwise someone is liable to open the other door
and blow all the air out of a ship or corridor.""All right. If there's
no alarm, there's nothing to worry about.""I'm not so sure." With flat
leaps, each one covering twenty feet in the Moon's baby gravity, the
sentry passed up the corridor to the air-lock recess. He stopped at a
wall panel on the way and activated three separate banks of ceiling
Floressoes, turning the area into a noonday of light.Bigman followed,
leaping clumsily and in perpetual danger of overbalancing into a slow
nose landing.Wilson had his blaster out. He inspected the door, then
turned to look up the corridor again. "Are you sure you didn't hear
anything?""Nothing," said Bigman. "Of course, I wasn't listening."THE
DOOMED SHIP 21Five minutes to zero time.0Pumice kicked up as the
space-suited figure moved slow-motion toward the Atlas. 0 The space-ship
glittered in the Earthlight, but on the Moon's airless surface the light
did not carry even an inch into the shadow of the ridge that hemmed in
the port.In three long leaps the figure moved across the lighted portion
and into the pitchy shadow of the ship itself.He moved up the ladder
hand over hand, flinging himself into an upward drift that carried him
ten rungs at a time. He came to the ship's air-lock. A moment at the
controls and it yawned open, then closed.The Atlas 0 had a passenger.
One passenger!432 _ _432 The sentry stood before the corridor air-lock
and considered its appearance dubiously.Bigman was rattling on. He said,
"I been here nearly a week. I'm supposed to follow my side-kick around
and make sure he doesn't get into trouble. How's that for a space
wrangler like me. I haven't had a chance to get away----"The anguished
sentry said, "Give it a rest, friend. Look, you're a nice kid and all
that, but let's have it some other?>time.For a moment he stared at the
control seal. "That's funny," he said.Bigman was swelling ominously. His
little face had reddened. He seized the sentry by the elbow and swung
him about, almost overbalancing himself as he did so."Hey, bud, who're
you calling a kid?""Look, go away!"22 LUCKY STARR"Just a minute. Let's
get something straight. Don't think I let myself get pushed around
because I'm not as tall as the next fellow. Put 'em up. Go ahead. Get
your fists up or I'll splatter your nose all over your face."He was
sparring and slipping about.Wilson looked at him with astonishment.
"What's got into you? Stop being foolish.""Scared?""I can't fight on
duty. Besides, I didn't mean to hurt your feelings. I've just got a job
to do and I haven't got any time for you."Bigman lowered his fists.
"Hey, I guess the ship's taking off."There was no sound, of course,
since sound would not travel through a vacuum, but the ground under
their feet vibrated softly in response to the hammer blows of a rocket
exhaust lifting a ship off a planet."That's it, all right." Wilson's
forehead creased. "Guess there's no use making a report. It's too late
anyway." He had forgotten about the control seal.432 _ _432Zero
time!0The ceramic-lined exhaust pit yawned under the Atlas 0 and the
main rockets blasted their fury into it. Slowly and majestically the
ship lifted and moved upward ponderously. Its speed increased. It
pierced the black sky, shrinking until it was only a star among stars,
and then it was gone.432 _ _432 Dr. Henree looked at his watch for the
fifth time and said, "Well, it's gone. It must be gone now." He pointed
with the stem of his pipe to the dial.THE DOOMED SHIP 23Conway said,
"Let's check with the port authorities."Five seconds later they were
looking at the empty space-port on the visiscreen. The exhaust pit was
still open. Even in the near-ultimate frigidity of the Moon's dark side
it was still steaming.Conway shook his head. "It was a beautiful
ship.""Still is.""I think of it in the past. In a few days it will be a
rain of molten metal. It's a doomed ship.""Let's hope that there's a
pirate base somewhere that's also doomed."Henree nodded somberly.They
both turned as the door opened. It was only Bigman.He broke into a grin.
"Oh, boy, it was sure nice coming in to Luna City. You could feel the
pounds going back on with each step you took." He stamped his feet and
hopped two or three times. "See," he said, "you try that out where I was
and you hit the ceiling and look like one big fool."Conway frowned.
"Where's Lucky?"Bigman said, "I know where he is. I know where he is
every minute. Say, the Atlas 0 has just taken off.""I know that," said
Conway. "And where is Lucky?""On the Atlas, 0 of course. Where do you
think he'd be?" CHAPTER 2VERMIN OF SPACEDr. Henree dropped his pipe and
it bounced on the linolite flooring. He paid it no
attention."What!"Conway reddened and his face stood out, plumply pink,
against his snowy hair. "Is this a joke?""No. He got on five minutes
before it blasted. I talked to the sentry, guy called Wilson, and kept
him from interfering. I had to pick a fight with the fellow and I would
have given him the old bingo-bango," he demonstrated the one-two punch
with quick, hard blows at the atmosphere, "but he backed off.""You let
him? You didn't warn us?""How could I? I've got to do what Lucky says.
He said he had to get on at the last minute and without anyone knowing,
or you and Dr. Henree would have stopped him."Conway groaned. "He did
it. By space, Gus, I should have known better than to trust that
pint-sized Martian. Bigman, you fool! You know that ship's a booby
trap.""Sure. Lucky knows it too. He says not to send out ships after him
or things will be ruined.""They will, will they? There'll be men after
him within the hour just the same."Henree clutched his friend's sleeve.
"Maybe not,26 LUCKY STARRHector. We don't know what he's planning to do,
but we can trust him to scramble out safely whatever it is. Let's not
interfere."Conway fell back, trembling with anger and anxiety.Bigman
said, "He says we're to meet him on Ceres, and also, Dr. Conway, he says
you're to control your temper.""You----" began Conway, and Bigman left
the room ina hurry.432 _ _432 The orbit of Mars lay behind and the sun
was a shrunken thing.Lucky Starr loved the silence of space. Since he
had graduated and joined the Council of Science, space had been his
home, rather than any planetary surface. And the Atlas 0 was a
comfortable ship. It had been provisioned for a full crew with only so
much omitted as might be explained by consumption before reaching the
asteroids. In every way the Atlas 0 was intended to look as though,
until the moment of the pirates' appearance, it had been fully manned.So
Lucky ate Syntho-steak from the yeast beds of Venus, Martian pastry, and
boneless chicken from Earth.I'll get fat, he thought, and watched the
skies.He was close enough to make out the larger asteroids. There was
Ceres, the largest of all, nearly five hundred miles in diameter. Vesta
was on the other side of the sun, but Juno and Pallas were in sight.If
he were to use the ship's telescope, he would have found more, thousands
more, maybe tens of thousands. There was no end to them.Once it had been
thought that there had been a planetVERMIN OF SPACE 27between Mars and
Jupiter and that geologic ages earlier it had exploded into fragments,
but that wasn't so. It was Jupiter that was the villain. Its giant
gravitational influence had disrupted space for hundreds of millions of
miles about it in the eons when the Solar System was being formed. The
cosmic gravel between itself and Mars could never coalesce into a single
planet with Jupiter pulling and pulling. Instead it coalesced into
myriads of little worlds.There were the four largest, each a hundred or
more miles in diameter. There were fifteen hundred more that were ten
and a hundred miles in diameter. After that there were thousands (no one
knew exactly how many) that were between one and ten miles in diameter
and tens of thousands that were less than a mile in diameter but still
as large or larger than the Great Pyramid.They were so plentiful that
astronomers called them "the vermin of space."The asteroids were
scattered over the entire region between Mars and Jupiter, each whirling
in its own orbit. No other planetary system known to man in all the
Galaxy had such an asteroid belt.In a sense it was good. The asteroids
had formed steppingstones out toward the major planets. In a sense it
was bad. Any criminal who could escape to the asteroids was safe from
capture by all but the most improbable chance. No police force could
search every one of those flying mountains.The smaller asteroids were no
man's land. There were well-manned astronomical observatories on the
largest, notably on Ceres. There were beryllium mines on Pallas,28 LUCKY
STARRwhile Vesta and Juno were important fueling stations. But that
still left fifty thousand sizable asteroids over which the Terrestrial
Empire had no control whatever. A few were large enough to harbor
fleets. Some were too small for more than a single speed-cruiser with
additional space, perhaps, for a six-month supply of fuel, food, and
water.And it was impossible to map them. Even in the ancient, preatomic
times, before space travel, when only fifteen hundred or so were known,
and those the largest, mapping had been impossible. Their orbits had
been carefully calculated via telescopic observation and still asteroids
were forever being "lost," then "found" again.432 _ _432 Lucky snapped
out of his reverie. The sensitive Er-gometer was picking up pulsations
from the outer reaches. He was at the control board in a step.The steady
energy outpourings of the sun, whether direct or by way of the
relatively tiny reflected dribbles from the planets, were canceled out
on the meter. What was coming in now were the characteristically
intermittent energy pulses of a hyperatomic motor.Lucky threw in the
Ergograph connection and the energy pattern traced itself out in a
series of lines. He followed the graphed paper as it emerged and his jaw
muscles hardened.There had always been a chance that the Atlas 0 might
meet an ordinary trading ship or passenger liner, but the energy pattern
was none of that. The approaching ship had motors of advanced design,
and different from any of the Terrestrial fleet.VERMIN OF SPACE 29Five
minutes passed before he had enough spread of measurement to be able to
calculate the distance and direction of the energy source.He adjusted
the visiplate for telescopic viewing and the star field speckled
enormously. Carefully he searched among the infinitely silent,
infinitely distant, infinitely motionless stars until a flicker of
movement caught his eyes and the Ergometer's reading dials lined up at
multiple zero.It was a pirate. No doubt! He could make out its outlines
by the half that glittered in the sun and by the port lights in the
shaded half. It was a thin, graceful vessel, having the look of speed
and maneuverability. It had an alien look about it, too.Sirian design,
thought Lucky.He watched the ship grow slowly larger on the screen. Was
it such a ship that his father and mother watched on the last day of
their lives?432 _ _432 He scarcely remembered his father and mother, but
he had seen pictures of them and had heard endless stories about
Lawrence and Barbara Starr from Henree and Conway. They had been
inseparable, the tall, grave Gus Henree, the choleric, persevering
Hector Conway, and the quick, laughing Larry Starr. They had gone to
school together, graduated simultaneously, entered the Council as one
and done all their assignments as a team.And then Lawrence Starr had
been promoted and assigned to a tour of duty on Venus. He, his wife, and
his four-year-old son were Venus-bound when the pirate ship attacked.30
LUCKY STARRFor years Lucky had unhappily imagined what that last hour
upon the dying ship must have been like. First, the crippling of the
main power drives at the stern of the ship while pirate and victim were
still apart. Then the blasting of the air-locks and the boarding. The
crew and passengers scrambling into space-suits against the loss of air
when the air-locks caved in. The crew armed and waiting. The passengers
huddling in the interior rooms without much hope. Women weeping.
Children screaming.His father wasn't among the hiders. His father was a
Council member. He had been armed and fighting. Lucky^was sure of that.
He had one memory, a short one that had been burned into his mind. His
father, a tall, strong man, was standing with blaster raised and face
set in what must have been one of the few moments of cold rage in his
life, as the door of the control room crashed inward in a cloud of black
smoke. And his mother, face wet and smudged but clearly seen through the
space-suit face-plate, was forcing him into a small lifeboat."Don't cry,
David, it will be all right."Those were the only words he remembered
ever having heard his mother say. Then there was thunder behind him and
he was pressed back against a wall.They found him in the lifeboat two
days later, when they followed its coldly automatic radio calls for
help.The government had launched a tremendous campaign against the
asteroid pirates immediately afterward and the Council had lent that
drive every last ounce of theirVERMIN OF SPACE 31own effort. For the
pirates it turned out that to attack and kill key men of the Council of
Science was bad business. Such asteroid hideouts as were located were
blasted into dust, and the pirate menace was reduced to the merest
flicker for twenty years.But often Lucky wondered if they had ever
located the particular pirate ship that had carried the men who had
killed his parents. There was no way of telling.And now the menace had
revived in a less spectacular but far more dangerous fashion. Piracy
wasn't a matter of individual jabs any longer. It bore the appearance of
an organized attack on Terrestrial commerce. There was more to it. From
the nature of the warfare carried on Lucky felt certain that one mind,
one strategic direction, lay behind it. That one mind, he knew, he would
have to find.432 _ _432 He lifted his eyes to the Ergometer once more.
The energy recordings were strong now. The other vessel was well within
the distance at which space courtesy required routine messages of mutual
identification. For that matter, it was well within the distance at
which a pirate might have made its initial hostile move.The floor
shuddered under Lucky. It wasn't a blaster bolt from the other ship, but
rather the recoil of a departing lifeboat. The energy pulses had become
strong enough to activate their automatic controls.Another shudder. And
another. Five altogether.He watched the oncoming ship closely. Often
pirates shot up such lifeboats, partly out of the perverted fun of32
LUCKY STARRit and partly to prevent escapees from describing the vessel,
assuming they had not done so already through the sub-ether.This time,
however, the ship ignored the lifeboats altogether. It approached within
locking range. Its magnetic grapples shot out, clamped on the Atlas's 0
hull, and the two vessels were suddenly welded together, their motions
through space well matched.Lucky waited.He heard the air-lock open, then
shut. He heard the clang of feet and the sound of helmets being
undipped, then the sound of voices.He didn't move.A figure appeared in
the door. Helmet and gauntlets had been removed, but the rest of the man
was still swathed in ice-coated space-suit. Space-suits had a habit of
doing that when one entered from the near-absolute zero of space into
the warm moist air of the interior of a ship. The ice was beginning to
melt.The pirate caught sight of Lucky only when he was two full steps
into the control room. He stopped, his face frozen in an almost comical
expression of surprise. Lucky had time to note the sparse black hair,
the long nose, and the dead white scar that ran from nostril to canine
tooth splitting the upper lip into two unequal parts.Lucky bore the
pirate's astonished scrutiny calmly. He had no fear of recognition.
Councilmen on active duty always worked without publicity with the very
thought that a too-well-known face would diminish their usefulness. His
own father's face had appeared over the sub-ether only after his death.
With fleeting bitterness LuckyVERMIN OF SPACE 33thought that perhaps
better publicity during life might have prevented the pirate attack. But
that was silly, he knew. By the time the pirates had seen Lawrence Starr
the attack had proceeded too far to be stopped.Lucky said, "I've got a
blaster. I'll use it only if you reach for yours. Don't move."The pirate
had opened his mouth. He closed it again.Lucky said, "If you want to
call the rest, go ahead."The pirate stared suspiciously, then, eyes
firmly on Lucky's blaster, yelled, "Blinking Space, there's a ripper
with a gat here."There was laughter at that, and a voice shouted,
"Quiet!"Another man stepped into the room. "Step aside, Dingo," he
said.His space-suit was off entirely and he was an incongruous sight
aboard ship. His clothing might have come out of the most fashionable
tailor shop in International City, and would have suited better a dinner
party back on Earth. His shirt had a silken look you got only out of the
best plastex. Its iridescence was subtle rather than garish, and his
tight-ankled breeches blended in so well that, but for the ornamented
belt, it would have seemed one garment. He wore a wristband that matched
his belt and a fluffy, sky-blue neck sash. His crisp brown hair was
curly and looked as though it received frequent attention.He was half a
head shorter than Lucky, but from the way he carried himself the young
Councilman could see that any assumption of softness he might make on
the basis of the man's dude costume would be quite wrong.34 LUCKY
STARRThe newcomer said pleasantly, "Anton is my name. Would you put down
your gun?"Lucky said, "And be shot?""You may be shot eventually, but not
at the moment. I would like to question you first."Lucky held fast.Anton
said, "I keep my word." A tiny flush appeared on his cheekbones. "It is
my only virtue as men count virtue, but I hold fast to it."Lucky put
down his blaster and Anton picked it up. He handed it to the other
pirate."Put it away, Dingo, and get out of here." He turned to Lucky.
"The other passengers got away in the lifeboats? Right?"Lucky said,
"That's an obvious trap, Anton----""Captain Anton, please." 0 He smiled,
but his nostrils flared."Well, then, it's a trap, Captain Anton. It was
obvious that you knew there were no passengers or crew on this ship. You
knew it long before you boarded.""Indeed? How do you make that out?""You
approached the ship without signaling and without a warning shot. You
made no particular speed. You ignored the lifeboats when they shot out.
Your men entered the ship carelessly, as though they expected no
resistance. The man who first found me entered this room with his
blaster well bolstered. The conclusion follows.""Very good. And what are
you doing on a ship without crew or passengers?"Lucky said grimly, "I
came to see you, Captain Anton."CHAPTER 3DUEL IN WORDAnton's expression
did not change. "And now you seej>me."But not privately, Captain."
Lucky's lips thinned and closed with great deliberation.Anton looked
quickly about. A dozen of his men in every stage of space-suit undress
had crowded into the room, watching and listening with gaping
interest.He reddened slightly. His voice rose. "Get on your business,
scum. I want a complete report on this ship. And keep your weapons
ready. There may be more men on board and if anyone else gets caught as
Dingo did, he'll be tossed out an air-lock."There was slow, shuffling
motion outward.Anton's voice was a sudden scream. "Quickly! Quickly!"
One snaking gesture, and a blaster was in his hand. "I'll count three
and shoot. One . . . two . . ."They were gone.He faced Lucky again. His
eyes glittered and his breath came and went quickly through pinched
white nostrils."Discipline is a great thing," he breathed. "They must
fear me. They must fear me more than they fear capture by the
Terrestrial Navy. Then a ship is one mind and one arm. My 0 mind and
arm."36 LUCKY STARRYes, thought Lucky, one mind and one arm, but whose?
Yours?Anton's smile had returned, boyish, friendly, and open. "Now tell
me what you want."Lucky jerked a thumb toward the other's blaster, still
drawn and ready. He matched the other's smile. "Do you intend shooting?
If so, get it over with."Anton was shaken. "Space! You're a cool one.
I'll shoot when I please. I like it this way. What's your name?" The
blaster held on its line with deadly steadiness."Williams,
Captain.""You're a tall man, Williams. You look strong. And yet here I
sit and with just a pressure of my thumb you're dead. I think it's very
instructive. Two men and one blaster is the whole secret of power. Did
you ever think of power, Williams?""Sometimes.""It's the only meaning to
life, don't you think?""Maybe.""I see you're anxious to do business.
Let's begin. Why are you here?""I've heard of pirates.""We're the men of
the asteroids, Williams. No other name.""That suits me. I've come to
join the men of the asteroids.""You flatter us, but my thumb is still on
the blaster contact. Why do you want to join?""Life is closed on Earth,
Captain. A man like myself could settle down to be an accountant or an
engineer. I might even run a factory or sit behind a desk and vote
atDUEL IN WORD 37stockholders' meetings. It doesn't matter. Whatever it
is, it would be routine. I would know my life from beginning to end.
There would be no adventure, no uncertainty.""You're a philosopher,
Williams. Go on.""There are the colonies, but I'm not attracted by a
life as a farm boy on Mars or as a vat tender on Venus. What does
attract me is the Me on the asteroids. You live hard and dangerously. A
man can rise to "power as you have. As you say, power gives meaning to
life.""So you stow away on an empty ship?""I didn't know it was empty. I
had-to stow away somewhere. Legitimate space passage comes high and
passports to the asteroids aren't being handed out these days. I knew
this ship was part of a mapping expedition. The word had got around. It
was headed for the asteroids. So I waited till just before it blasted
off. That's when everybody would be busy getting ready for take-off and
yet the air-locks would still be open. I had a pal take a sentry out of
circulation."I figured we'd stop at Ceres. It would be bound to be Prime
Base for any asteroid expedition. Once there, it seemed to me I could
get off without trouble. The crew would be astronomers and
mathematicians. Snatch off their glasses and they'd be blind. Point a
blaster at them and they'd die of fright. Once on Ceres I'd contact the
pi----The men of the asteroids, somehow. Simple.""Only you got a
surprise when you boarded ship? Is that it?" asked Anton."I'll say. No
one aboard and before I could get it straight in my mind that there
wasn't 0 anyone aboard, it blasted off."38 LUCKY STARR"What's it all
about, Williams? How do you figure it?" "I don't. It beats me.""Well,
let's see if we can find out. You and I together." He gestured with his
blaster and said sharply, "Come>5on.The pirate chief led the way out of
the control room into the long central corridor of the ship. A group of
men came out of a door up ahead. They rumbled short comments at one
another and stilled into silence when they caught Anton's eyes.Anton
said, "Come here."They approached. One wiped a grizzled mustache with
the back of his hand and said, "No one else on board this ship,
Captain.""All right. What do you think of the ship?"There were four of
them. The number increased as more men joined the group.Anton's voice
grew edgy. "What do any of you think of the ship?"Dingo pushed his way
forward. He had got rid of his space-suit and Lucky could see him as a
man. It was not altogether a pleasant sight. He was broad and heavy and
his arms were slightly bowed as they hung loosely from bulging
shoulders. There were tufts of dark hair on the back of his fingers and
the scar on his upper lip twitched. His eyes glared at Lucky.He said, "I
don't like it.""You don't like the ship?" Anton asked sharply.Dingo
hesitated. He straightened his arms, threw back his shoulders. "It
stinks.""Why? Why do you say that?"DUEL IN WORD 39"I could take it apart
with a can opener. Ask the rest and see if they don't agree with me.
This crate is put together with toothpicks. It wouldn't hold together
for three months."There were murmurs of agreement. The man with the gray
mustache said, "Beg your pardon, Captain, but the wiring is taped in
place. It's a two-bit job. The insulation is almost burnt through
already.""All the welding was done in a real hurry," said another. "The
seams stand out like that." He held out a thick and dirty thumb."What
about repairs?" asked Anton.Dingo said, "It would take a year and a
Sunday. It isn't worth it. Anyway, we couldn't do it here. We'd have to
take it to one of the rocks."Anton turned to Lucky, explaining suavely,
"We always refer to the asteroids as 'rocks,' you understand."Lucky
nodded.Anton said, "Apparently my men feel that they wouldn't care to
ride this ship. Why do you suppose the Earth government would send out
an empty ship and such a jerry-built job to boot?""It keeps getting more
and more confusing," said Lucky."Let's complete our investigation,
then."Anton walked first. Lucky followed closely. The men tagged behind
silently. The back of Lucky's neck prickled. Anton's back was straight
and fearless, as though he expected no attack from Lucky. He might well
feel so. Ten armed men were on Lucky's heels.They glanced through the
small rooms, each designed40 LUCKY STARRfor utmost economy in space.
There was the computation room, the small observatory, the photographic
laboratory, the galley and the bunk rooms.They slipped down to the lower
level through a narrow curving tube within which the pseudo-grav field
was neutralized so that either direction could be "up" or "down" at
will. Lucky was motioned down first, Anton following so closely that
Lucky barely had time to scramble out of the way (his legs buckling
slightly with the sudden access of weight) before the pirate chief was
upon him. Hard, heavy space-boots missed his face by inches.Lucky
regained his balance and whirled angrily, but Anton was standing there
smiling pleasantly, his blaster lined up straight and true at Lucky's
heart."A thousand apologies," he said. "Fortunately you are quite
agile.""Yes," muttered Lucky.On the lower level were the engine room and
the power plant; the empty berths where the lifeboats had been. There
were the fuels store, the food and water stores, the air fresheners, and
the atomic shielding.Anton murmured, "Well, what do you think of it all?
Shoddy, perhaps, but I see nothing out of order.""It's hard to tell like
this," said Lucky."But you must have lived on this ship for days.""Sure,
but I didn't spend time looking it over. I just waited for it to get
somewhere.""I see. Well, back to upper level."Lucky was first "down" the
travel tube again. ThisDUEL IN WORD 41time he landed lightly and sprang
six feet to one side with the grace of a cat.Seconds passed before Anton
popped out of the tube. "Jumpy?" he asked.Lucky flushed.One by one the
pirates appeared. Anton did not wait for all of them, but started down
the corridor again."You know," he said, "you'd think we'd been all over
this ship. Most people would say so. Wouldn't you say so?""No," said
Lucky calmly, "I wouldn't. We haven't been in the washroom."Anton
scowled and for more than just a moment the pleasantness was gone from
his face, and only a tight, white anger flashed in its place.Then it
passed. He adjusted a stray lock of hair on his head, then regarded the
back of his hand with interest. "Well, let's look there."Several of the
men whistled and the rest exclaimed in a variety of ways when the
appropriate door clicked open."Very nice," murmured Anton. "Very nice.
Luxurious, I would say."It was! There was no question of that. There
were separate stall showers, three of them, with their plumbing arranged
for sudsing water (hike-warm) and rinsing water (hot or cold). There
were also half a dozen washbowls in ivory-chrome, with shampoo stands,
hair driers and needle-jet skin stimulators. Nothing that was necessary
was missing.42 LUCKY STARR"There's certainly nothing shoddy about this,"
said Anton. "It's like a show on the sub-etherics, eh, Williams? What do
you make of this?""I'm confused."Anton's smile vanished like the
fleeting flash of a speeding space-ship across a visiplate. "I'm not.
Dingo, come in here."The pirate chief said to Lucky, "It's a simple
problem, you. We have a ship here with no one aboard, thrown together in
the cheapest possible way, as though it were done in a hurry, but with a
washroom that is the last word. Why? I think it's just in order to have
as many pipes as possible in 0 the washroom. And why that? So that we'd
never suspect that one or two of them were dummies. . . . Dingo, which
pipe is it?"Dingo kicked one."Well, don't kick it, you misbegotten fool.
Take it apart."Dingo did so, a micro-heatgun flashing briefly. He yanked
out wires."What's that, Williams?" demanded Anton."Wires," said Lucky
briefly."I know that, you lump." He was suddenly furious. "What else?
I'll tell you 0 what else. Those wires are set to explode every ounce of
the atomite on board ship as soon as we take the ship back to
base."Lucky jumped. "How can you tell that?""You're surprised? You
didn't know this was one big trap? You didn't know we were supposed to
take this back to base for repairs? You didn't know we were supposed to
explode ourselves and the base, too, into hotDUEL IN WORD 43dust? Why,
you're here as the bait to make sure we were-properly fooled. Only I'm
not a fool!"His men were crowding close. Dingo licked his lips.With a
snap Anton brought up his blaster and there was no mercy, no dream of
mercy, in his eyes."Wait! Great Galaxy, wait! I know nothing about this.
You have no right to shoot me without cause." He tensed for a jump, one
last fight before death."No right!" Anton, eyes glaring, lowered his
blaster suddenly. "How dare you say no right. I have all rights on this
ship.""You can't kill a good man. The men of the asteroids need good
men. Don't throw one away for nothing."A sudden, unexpected murmur came
from some of the pirates.A voice said, "He's got guts, Cap'n. Maybe we
could use----"It died away as Anton turned.He turned back. "What makes
you a good man, Williams? Answer that and I'll consider.""I'll hold my
own against anyone here. Bare fists or any weapon.""So?" Anton's teeth
bared themselves. "You hear that, men?"There was an affirmative
roar."It's your challenge, Williams. Any weapon. Good! Come out of this
alive and you won't be shot. You'll be considered for membership in my
crew.""I have your word, Captain?""You have my word, and I never break
my word. The crew hears me. If 0 you come out of this alive."44 LUCKY
STARR"Whom do I fight?" demanded Lucky."Dingo here. A good man. Anyone
who can beat him is a very 0 good man."Lucky measured the huge lump of
gristle and sinew standing before him, its little eyes glittering with
anticipation, and glumly agreed with the captain.But he said firmly,
"What weapons? Or is it bare fists?""Weapons! Push-tubes, to be exact.
Push-tubes in open space."For a moment Lucky found it difficult to
maintain an appropriate stolidity.Anton smiled. "Are you afraid it won't
be a proper test for you? Don't be. Dingo is the best man with a
push-gun in our entire fleet."Lucky's heart plummeted. A push-gun duel
required an expert. Notoriously so! Played as he had played it in
college days, it was a sport. Fought by professionals, it was deadly!And
he was no professional!CHAPTER 4DUEL IN DEEDPirates crowded the outer
skin of the Atlas 0 and of their own Sirian-designed ship. Some were
standing, held by the magnetic field of their boots. Others had cast
themselves loose for better viewing, maintaining their place by means of
a short magnetic cable attached to the ship's hull.Fifty miles apart two
metal-foil goal posts had been set. Not more than three feet square in
their collapsed state aboard ship, they opened into a hundred feet
either way of thin-beaten beryl-magnesium sheets. Undimmed and undamaged
in the great emptiness of space, they were set spinning, and the
flickering reflections of the sun on their gleaming surfaces sent beams
that were visible for miles."You know the rules." Anton's voice was loud
in Lucky's ears, and presumably in Dingo's ears as well.Lucky could make
out the other's space-suited shape as a sunlit speck half a mile away.
The lifeboat that had brought them here was racing away now, back toward
the pirate ship."You know the rules," said Anton's voice. "The one who
gets pushed back to his own goal post is the loser. If neither gets
pushed back, the one whose push-gun expires first is the loser. No time
limit. No off-side. You46 LUCKY STARRhave five minutes to get set. The
push-gun can't be used till the word is given."No off-side, thought
Lucky. That was the giveaway. Push duels as a legal sport could not take
place more than a hundred miles from an asteroid at least fifty miles in
diameter. This would place a definite, though small, gravitational pull
on the players. It would not be enough to affect mobility. It would be
enough, however, to rescue a contestant who found himself miles out in
space with an expired push-gun. Even if not picked up by the rescue boat
he had only to remain quiet and in a matter of hours or, at most, one or
two days, he would drift back to the asteroid's surface.Here, on the
other hand, there was no sizable asteroid within hundreds of thousands
of miles. A real push would continue indefinitely. It would end, as
likely as not, in the sun, long after the unlucky contestant had
smothered to death when his oxygen gave out. Under such conditions it
was usually understood that, when one contestant or another passed
outside certain set limits, time was called until their return.Saying
"no off-side" was saying "to the death."Anton's voice came clear and
sharp across the miles of space between himself and the radio receiver
in Lucky's helmet. He said, "Two minutes to go. Adjust body
signals."Lucky brought his hand up and closed the switch set into his
chest. The colored metal foil which had earlier been magnet-set into his
helmet was spinning. It was a miniature goal post. Dingo's figure, a
moment before merely a dim dot, now sprang into flickering ruddy
hie.DUEL IN DEED 47His own signal, Lucky knew, was a flashing green. And
the goal posts were pure white.Even now a fraction of Lucky's mind was
far away. He had tried to make one objection at the very beginning. He
had said, "Look, this all suits me, you understand. But while we're
fooling around, a government patrol ship might----"Anton barked
contemptuously, "Forget it. No patrol ship would have the guts to get
this far into the rocks. We've a hundred ships within call, a thousand
rocks to hold us if we had to make a getaway. Get into your suit."A
hundred ships! A thousand rocks! If true, the pirates had never yet
shown their full hand. What was going on?"One minute left!" said Anton's
voice through space.Grimly Lucky brought up his two push-guns. They were
L-shaped objects connected by springy, gummed-f abric tubing to the
doughnutlike gas cylinders (containing carbon dioxide liquid under great
pressure) that had been adjusted about his waist. In the old days the
connecting tubing had been metal mesh. But that, though stronger, had
also been more massive and had added to the momentum and inertia of the
guns. In push duels rapid aiming and firing was essential. Once a
fluorinated silicone had been invented which could remain a flexible gum
at space temperatures and yet not become tacky in the direct rays of the
sun, the lighter tubing material was universally used."Fire when ready!"
cried Anton.One of Dingo's push-guns triggered for an instant. The
liquid carbon dioxide of his gas cylinder bubbled into violent gas and
spurted out through the push-gun's48 LUCKY STARRneedlelike orifice. The
gas froze into a line of tiny crystals within six inches of its point of
emersion. Even in the half second allowed for release a line of
crystals, miles long, had been formed. As they pushed out one way, Dingo
was pushed in the other. It was a spaceship and its rocket blast in
miniature.Three times the "crystal line" flashed and faded in the
distance. It pointed into space directly away from Lucky, and each time
Dingo gained speed toward Lucky. The actual state of affairs was
deceptive. The only change visible to the eye was the slow brightening
of Dingo's suit signal, but Lucky knew that the distance between them
was closing with hurtling velocity.What Lucky did not know was the
proper strategy to expect; the appropriate defense. He waited to let the
other's offensive moves unfold.Dingo was large enough now to see as a
humanoid shape with head and four limbs. He was passing to one side, and
making no move to adjust his aim. He seemed content to bear far to
Lucky's left.Lucky still waited. The chorus of confused cries that rang
in his helmet had died down. They came from the open transmitters of the
audience. Though these were too far away to see the contestants, they
could still follow the passage of the body signals and the flashes of
the carbon dioxide streams. They were expecting something, Lucky
thought.It came suddenly.A blast of carbon dioxide, then another
appeared to Dingo's right, and his line of flight veered toward the
young Councilman's position. Lucky brought his push-DUEL IN DEED 49gun
up, ready to flash downward and avoid close quarters. The safest
strategy, he thought, was to do just that, and to move as slowly and as
little as possible otherwise, in order to conserve carbon dioxide.But
Dingo's flight did not continue toward Lucky. He fired straight ahead of
himself, a long streak, and began to recede. Lucky watched him, and only
too late the streak of light met his eyes.The line of carbon dioxide
that Dingo had last fired traveled forward, yes, but he had been moving
leftward at the time and so it did likewise. The two motions together
moved it directly toward Lucky and it struck his left shoulder
bull's-eye.To Lucky it felt like a sharp blow pounding him. The crystals
were tiny, but they extended for miles and they were traveling at miles
per second. They all hit his suit in the space of what seemed a fraction
of an eyelid's flicker. Lucky's suit trembled and the roar of the
audience was in his ear."You got him, Dingo!""What a blast!""Straight
toward goal post. Look at him!""It was beautiful. Beautiful!""Look at
the joker spin!"Underneath that there were murmurs that seemed, somehow,
less exuberant.Lucky was spinning or, rather, it seemed to his eyes that
the heavens and all the stars in it were spinning. Across the face plate
of his helmet the stars were white streaks, as though they were sparkles
of trillions of carbon dioxide crystals themselves.50 LUCKY STARRHe
could see nothing but the numerous blurs. For a moment it was as though
the blow had knocked the power of thinking out of him.A blow in the
midriff and one in the back sent him, still spinning, further on his
hurtling way through space.He had to do something or Dingo would make a
football of him from one end of the Solar System to the other. The first
thing was to stop the spin and get his bearings. He was tumbling
diagonally, left shoulder over right hip. He pointed the push-gun in the
direction counter to that twist, and in lightning releases pumped out
streams of carbon dioxide.The stars slowed until their turning was a
stately march that left them sharply defined points. The sky became the
familiar sky of space.One star flickered and was too bright. Lucky knew
it to be his own goal post. Almost diametrically opposed was the angry
red of Dingo's body signal. Lucky could not fling himself backward
beyond the goal post or the duel would be over and he would have lost.
Beyond the goal post and within a mile of it was the standard rule for a
goal ending. Nor, on the other hand, could he afford to get closer to
his opponent.He brought his push-gun straight up over his head, closed
contact, and held it so. He counted a full minute before he released
contact, and through all the sixty seconds he felt the pressure against
the top of his helmet as he accelerated downward.It was a desperate
maneuver, for he threw away a half hour's supply of gas in that one
minute.DUEL IN DEED 51Dingo, in outrage, yelled hoarsely, "You
flumstered coward! You yellow mugger!"The cries of the audience also
rose to a crescendo."Look at him run.""He got past Dingo. Dingo, get
him.""Hey, Williams. Put up a fight."Lucky saw the crimson blur of his
enemy again.He had to keep on the move. There was nothing else he could
do. Dingo was an expert and could hit a one-inch meteorite as it flashed
by. He himself, Lucky thought ruefully, would do well to hit Ceres at a
mile.He used his push-guns alternately. To the left, to the right; then
quickly, to the right, to the left and to the right again.It made no
difference. It was as though Dingo could foretell his moves, cut across
the corners, move in inexorably.Lucky felt the perspiration beading out
upon his forehead, and suddenly he was aware of the silence. He could
not remember the exact moment it had come, but it had come like the
breaking of a thread. One moment there had been the yells and laughter
of the pirates, and the next moment only the dead silence of space where
sound could never be heard.Had he passed beyond range of the ships?
Impossible! Suit radios, even the simplest type, would carry thousands
of miles in space. He pushed the sensitivity dial on his chest to
maximum."Captain Anton!"But it was Dingo's rough voice that answered.
"Don't yell. I hear you."52 LUCKY STARRLucky said, "Call time! There's
something wrong with my radio."Dingo was close enough to be made out as
a human figure again. A flashing line of crystals and he was closer.
Lucky moved away, but the pirate followed on his heels."Nothing wrong,"
said Dingo. "Just a gimmicked radio. I've been waiting. I've been
waiting. I could have knocked you past goal long ago, but I've been
waiting for the radio to go. It's just a little transistor I gimmicked
before you put on your suit. You can still talk to me, though. It'll
still carry a mile or two. Or at least you can talk to me for a little
while." He relished the joke and barked l^is laughter.Lucky said, "I
don't get it."Dingo's voice turned harshly cruel. "You caught me on the
ship with my blaster in its holster. You trapped me there. You made me
look like a fool. No one traps me and I don't let anyone make a fool out
of me in front of the captain and live very long after that. I'm not
goaling you for someone else to finish. I'm finishing you here!
Myself!"Dingo was much closer. Lucky could almost make out the face
behind the thick glassite of the face plate.Lucky abandoned attempts at
bobbing and weaving. That would lead, he decided, to being consistently
out-maneuvered. He considered straight flight, pushing outward at
increasing velocity as long as his gas held out.But then afterward? And
was he going to be content to die while running away?He would have to
fight back. He aimed the push-gun at Dingo, and Dingo wasn't there when
the line of crys-DUEL IN DEED 53tals passed through the spot where a
moment before he had 0 been. He tried again and again, but Dingo was a
flitting demon.And then Lucky felt the hard impact of the other's
push-gun blast and he was spinning again. Desperately he tried to come
out of the spin and before he could do so, he felt the clanging force of
a body's collision with his.Dingo held his suit in tight embrace.Helmet
to helmet. Face plate to face plate. Lucky was staring at the white scar
splitting Dingo's upper lip. It spread tightly as Dingo smiled."Hello,
chum," he said. "Pleased to meet you."For a moment Dingo floated away,
or seemed to, as he loosened the grip of his arms. The pirate's thighs
held firm about Lucky's knees, their apelike strength immobilizing him.
Lucky's own whipcord muscles wrenched this way and that
uselessly.Dingo's partial retreat had only been designed to free his
arms. One lifted high, push-gun held butt-first. It came down directly
on the face plate and Lucky's head snapped back with the sudden,
shattering impact. The relentless arm swung up again, while the other
curled about Lucky's neck."Hold your head still," the pirate snarled.
"I'm finishing this."Lucky knew that to be the literal truth unless he
acted quickly. The glassite was strong and tough, but it would hold out
only so long against the battering of metal.He brought up the heel of
his gauntleted hand against Dingo's helmet, straightening his arm and
pushing the pirate's head back. Dingo rocked his head to one side,54
LUCKY STARRdisengaging Lucky's arm. He brought the butt of his push-gun
down a second time.Lucky dropped both push-guns, let them dangle from
their connecting tubes, and with a sure movement snatched at the
connecting tubes of Dingo's guns. He threaded them between the fingers
of his steel gloves. The muscles of his arms lumped and tightened
painfully. His jaws clenched and he felt the blood creep to his
temples.Dingo, his mouth twisted in fierce joyful anticipation,
disregarded everything but the upturned face of his victim behind the
transparent face plate, contorted, as he thought, with fear. Once more
the butt came down. A small cracking star appeared where the metal had
struck.Then something else gave and the universe seemed to go mad.First
one and, almost immediately afterward, the other of the connecting tubes
of Dingo's two push-guns parted and an uncontrollable stream of carbon
dioxide ravened out of each broken tube.The tubes whipped like insane
snakes, and Lucky was slammed against his suit first this way, then
that, in violent reaction to the mad and uncontrolled acceleration.Dingo
yelled in jolted surprise and his grip loosened.The two almost
separated, but Lucky held on grimly to one of the pirate's ankles.The
carbon dioxide stream slackened and Lucky went up his opponent's leg
hand over hand.They were apparently motionless now. The chance whippings
of the stream had left them even without anyDUEL IN DEED 55perceptible
spin. Dingo's push-gun tubes, now dead and flaccid, stretched out in
their last position. All seemed still, as still as death.But that was a
delusion. Lucky knew they were traveling at miles per second in whatever
direction that last stroke of gas had sent them. They were alone and
lost in space, the two of them. CHAPTER 5THE HERMIT ON THE ROCKLucky was
on Dingo's back now and it was his thighs that gripped the other's
waist. He spoke softly and grimly. "You can hear me, Dingo, can't you? I
don't know where we are or where we're going, but neither do you. So we
need each other now, Dingo. Are you ready to make a deal? You can find
out where we are because your radio will reach the ships, but you can't
get back without carbon dioxide. I have enough for both of us, but I'll
need you to guide us back.""To space with you, you scupper," yelled
Dingo. "When I'm done with you, I'll have 0 your push-tubes.""I don't
think you will," said Lucky coolly."You think you'll let them loose,
too. Go ahead! Go ahead, you loshing ripper! What good will that do? The
captain will come for me wherever I am while you're floating around with
a busted helmet and frozen blood on your face.""Not exactly, my friend.
There's something in your back, you know. Maybe you can't feel it
through the metal, but it's there, I assure you.""A push-gun. So what.
It doesn't mean a thing as long as we're held together." But his arms
halted their writhing attempt to seize Lucky."I'm not a push-gun
duelist." Lucky sounded cheerful58 LUCKY STARRabout it. "But I still
know more than you do about push-guns. Push-gun shots are exchanged
miles apart. There's no air resistance to slow and mess up the gas
stream, but there's internal resistance. There's always some turbulence
in the stream. The crystals knock together, slow up. The line of gas
widens. If it misses its mark, it finally spreads out in space and
vanishes, but if it finally hits, it still kicks like a mule after miles
of travel.""What in space are you talking about? What are you running
off about?" The pirate twisted with bull strength, and Lucky grunted as
he forced him back.Lucky said, "Just this. What do you suppose happens
when the carbon dioxide hits at two inches, before turbulence has done
anything at all to cut down its velocity or to broaden the beam. Don't
guess. I'll tell you. It would cut through your suit as though it were a
blowtorch, and through your body, too.""You're nuts! You're talking
crazy!"Dingo swore madly, but of a sudden he was holding his body
stiffly motionless."Try it, then," said Lucky. "Move! My push-gun ishard
against your suit and I'm squeezing the trigger. Try ., . 'bb it
out."You're fouling me," snarled Dingo. "This isn't a clean . 'bb
win."I've got a crack in my face plate," said Lucky. "The men will know
where the foul is. You have half a minute to make up your mind."The
seconds passed in silence. Lucky caught the motion of Dingo's hand.He
said, "Good-by, Dingo!"THE HERMIT ON THE ROCK 59Dingo cried thickly,
"Wait! Wait! 0 I'm just extending my sending range." Then he called,
"Captain Anton . . . Captain Anton ..."It took an hour and a half to get
back to the ships.432 _ _432 The At las 0 was moving through space again
in the wake of its pirate captor. Its automatic circuits had been
shifted to manual controls wherever necessary, and a prize crew of three
controlled its power. As before, it had a passenger list of one-Lucky
Starr.Lucky was confined to a cabin and saw the crew only when they
brought him his rations. The Atlas's 0 own rations, thought Lucky. Or,
at least, such as were left. Most of the food and such equipment that
wasn't necessary for the immediate maneuvering of the ship had already
been transferred to the pirate vessel.All three pirates brought him his
first meal. They were lean men, browned by the unsoftened rays of the
sun of space.They gave him his tray in silence, inspected the cabin
cautiously, stood by while he opened the cans and let their contents
warm up, then carried away the remains.Lucky said, "Sit down, men. You
don't have to stand while I eat."They did not answer. One, the thinnest
and lankest of the three, with a nose that had once been broken and was
now bent sideways, and an Adam's-apple that jutted sharply outward,
looked at the others as though he felt inclined to accept the
invitation. He met with no response, however.The next meal was brought
by Broken Nose alone. He60 LUCKY STARRput down the tray, went back to
the door, which he opened. He looked up and down the corridor, closed
the door again, and said, "I'm Martin Maniu."Lucky smiled. "I'm Bill
Williams. The other two don't talk to me, eh?""They're Dingo's friends.
But I'm not. Maybe you're a government man like the captain thinks, and
maybe you're not. I don't know. But as far as I'm concerned, anyone who
does what you did to that scupper, Dingo, is all right. He's a wise guy
and he plays rough. He got me into a push fight once when I was new. He
nearly pushed me into an asteroid. For no reason, either. He claimed it
was a mistake, but listen, he doesn't make any mistakes with a pusher.
You made quite a few friends, mister, when you dragged back that hyena
by the seat of his pants.""I'm glad of that, anyway.""But watch out for
him. He'll never forget it. Don't ever be alone with him even twenty
years from now. I'm telling you. It isn't just beating him, you see.
It's bluffing him with the story about cutting through an inch of metal
with the carbon dioxide. Everyone's laughing at him and he's sick about
it. Man, I mean sick! It's the best thing that's ever happened. Man, I
sure hope the Boss gives you a clean bill.""The Boss? Captain
Anton?""No, the Boss. The big fellow. Say, the food you've got on board
ship is good. Especially the meat." The pirate smacked his lips loudly.
"You get tired of all these yeast mashes, especially when you're in
charge of a vat yourself."THE HERMIT ON THE ROCK 61Lucky was brushing up
the remainder of his meal. "Who is 0 this guy?""Who?""The Boss."Maniu
shrugged. "Space! I don't know. You don't think a guy like me would ever
meet him. Just someone the fellows talk about. It stands to reason
someone's 0 boss.""The organization is pretty complicated.""Man, you
never know till you join. Listen, I was dead broke when I came out here.
I didn't know what to do. I thought, well, we'll bang up a few ships and
then I'll get mine and it'll be over. You know, it would be better than
starving to death like I was doing.""It wasn't that way?""No. 0 I've
never been on a raiding expedition. Hardly any of us are. Just a few
like Dingo. He 0 goes out all the time. He likes it, the scupper. Mostly
we go out and pick up a few women sometimes." The pirate smiled. "I've
got a wife and a kid. You wouldn't believe that now, would you? Sure,
we've got a little project of our own. Have our own vats. Once in a
while I draw space duty, like now, for instance. It's a soft life. You
could do all right, if you join up. A good-looking fellow like you could
get a wife in no time and settle down. Or there's plenty of excitement
if that's what you want."Yes, sir, Bill. I hope the Boss takes
you."Lucky followed him to the door. "Where are we going, by the way?
One of the bases?""Just to one of the rocks, I guess. Whichever is
nearest.62 LUCKY STARRYou'll stay there till the word comes through.
It's what they usually do."He added as he closed the door, "And don't
tell the fellows, or anybody, I've been talking to you. Okay, pal?""Sure
thing."Alone again, Lucky pounded a fist slowly and softly into his
palm. The Boss! Was that just talk? Scuttlebutt? Or did it mean
something? And what about the rest of the conversation?He had to wait.
Galaxy! If only Conway and Henree had the good sense not to interfere
for a while longer.432 _ _432 Lucky did not get a chance to view the
"rock" as the Atlas 0 approached. He did not see it until, preceded by
Martin Maniu and followed by a second pirate, he stepped out of the
air-lock into space and found it a hundred yards below.The asteroid was
quite typical. Lucky judged it to be two miles across the longest way.
It was angular and craggy, as though a giant had torn off the top of a
mountain and tossed it out into space. Its sunside glimmered gray-brown,
and it was turning visibly, shadows shifting and changing.He pushed
downward toward the asteroid as he left the air-lock, flexing his leg
muscles against the ship's hull. The crags floated up slowly toward
himself. When his hands touched ground, his inertia forced the rest of
his body on downward, tumbling him in slowest motion until he could
grasp a projection and bring himself to a halt.He stood up. There was
almost the illusion of aTHE HERMIT ON THE ROCK 63planetary surface about
the rock. The nearest jags of matter, however, had nothing behind them,
nothing but space. The stars, moving visibly as the rock turned, were
hard, bright glitters. The ship, which had been put into an orbit about
the rock, remained motionless overhead.A pirate led the way, some fifty
feet, to a rise in rock in no way distinguished from its surroundings.
He made it in two long steps. As they waited a section of the rise
slipped aside, and from the opening a space-suited figure stepped
out."Okay, Herm," said one of the pirates, gruffly, "here he is. He's in
your care now."The voice that next sounded in Lucky's receiver was
gentle and rather weary. "How long will he be with me, gentlemen?""Till
we come to get him. And don't ask questions."The pirates turned away and
leaped upward. The rock's gravity could do nothing to stop them. They
dwindled steadily and after a few minutes, Lucky saw a brief flash of
crystals as one of them corrected his direction of travel by means of a
push-gun; a small one, routinely used for such purposes, that was part
of standard suit equipment. Its gas supply consisted of a built-in
carbon dioxide cartridge.Minutes passed and the ship's rear jets gleamed
redly. It, too, began dwindling.It was useless to try to check the
direction in which it was leaving, Lucky knew, without some knowledge of
his own location in space. And of that, except that he was somewhere in
the asteroid belt, he knew nothing.So intense was his absorption that he
was almost64 LUCKY STARRstartled at the soft voice of the other man on
the asteroid.He said, "It is beautiful out here. I come out so rarely
that sometimes I forget. Look there!"Lucky turned to his left. The small
Sun was just poking above the sharp edge of the asteroid. In a moment it
was too bright to look at. It was a gleaming twenty-credit gold piece.
The sky, black before, remained black, and the stars shone undiminished.
That was the way on an airless world where there was no dust to scatter
sunlight and turn the heavens a deep, masking blue.The man of the
asteroid said, "In twenty-five minutes or so it will be setting again.
Sometimes, when Jupiter is at its closest, you can see it, too, like a
little marble, with its four satellites like sparks lined up in military
formation. But that only happens every three and a half years. This
isn't the time."Lucky said bluntly, "Those men called you Herm. Is that
your name? Are you one of them?""You mean am I a pirate? No. But I'll
admit I may be an accessory after the fact. Nor is my name Herm. That's
just a term they use for hermits in general. My name, sir, is Joseph
Patrick Hansen, and since we are to be companions at close quarters for
an indefinite period, I hope we shall be friends."He held out a
metal-sheathed hand, and Lucky grasped it."I'm Bill Williams," he said.
"You say you're a hermit? Do you mean by that that you live here all the
time?""That's right."Lucky looked about the poor splinter of granite and
silica and frowned. "It doesn't look very inviting."THE HERMIT ON THE
ROCK 65"Nevertheless I'll try to do my best to make you comfortable."The
hermit touched a section of the slab of rock out of which he had come
and a piece of it wheeled open once again. Lucky noted that the edges
had been beveled and lined with lastium or some similar material to
insure air tightness."Won't you step inside, Mr. Williams?" invited the
hermit.Lucky did so. The rock slab closed behind them. As it closed, a
small Fluoro lit up and shone away the obscurity. It revealed a small
air-lock, not much larger than was required to hold two men.A small red
signal light flickered, and the hermit said, "You can open your
face-plate now. We've got air." He did so himself as he spoke.Lucky
followed suit, dragging in lungfuls of clear, fresh air. Not bad. Better
than the air on shipboard. Definitely.But it was when the inner door of
the air-lock opened that the wind went out of Lucky in one big gasp.
CHAPTER 6WHAT THE HERMIT KNEWLucky had seen few such luxurious rooms
even on Earth. It was thirty feet long, twenty wide, and thirty high. A
balcony circled it. Above and below the walls were lined with book
films. A wall projector was set on a pedestal, while on another was a
gemlike model of the Galaxy. The lighting was entirely indirect.As soon
as he set foot within the room, he felt the tug of pseudo-grav motors.
It wasn't set at Earth normal. From the feel of it it seemed somewhere
between Earth and Mars normal. There was a delightful sensation of
lightness and yet enough pull to allow full muscular co-ordination.The
hermit had removed his space-suit and suspended it over a white plastic
trough into which the frost that had collected thickly over it when they
stepped out of frozen space and into the warm, moist air of the room
might trickle as it melted.He was tall and straight, his face was pink
and un-lined, but his hair was quite white, as were his bushy eyebrows,
and the veins stood out on the back of his hands.He said politely, "May
I help you with your suit?"Lucky came to life. "That's all right." He
clambered out quickly. "This is an unusual place you have here.""You
like it?" Hansen smiled. "It took many years to68 LUCKY STARRmake it
look like this. Nor is this all there is to my littlehome." He seemed
filled with a quiet pride."I imagine so," said Lucky. "There must be a
power-plant for light and heat as well as to keep the pseudo-grav field
alive. You must have an air purifier and re-placer, water supplies, food
stores, all that. "That's right." "A hermit's life is not bad."The
hermit was obviously both proud and pleased. "It doesn't have to be," he
said. "Sit down, Williams, sit down. Would you like a drink?""No, thank
you." Lucky lowered himself into an armchair. Its apparently normal seat
and back masked a soft diamagnetic field that gave under his weight only
so far, then achieved a balance that molded itself to every curve of his
body. "Unless you can scare up a cup of coffee?"Easily!" The old man
stepped into an alcove. In seconds he was back with a fragrant and
steaming cup, plus a second for himself.The arm of Lucky's chair
unfolded into a narrow ledge at the proper touch of Hansen's toe and the
hermit set down one cup into an appropriate recess. As he did so he
paused to stare at the younger man. Lucky looked up. "Yes?" Hansen shook
his head. "Nothing. Nothing. They faced one another. The lights in the
more distant parts of the large room faded until only the area
immediately surrounding the two men was clear to vision. "And now if
you'll pardon an old man's curiosity, said the hermit, "I'd like to ask
you why you've come here."WHAT THE HERMIT KNEW 69"I didn't come. I was
brought," said Lucky."You mean you're not one of----" Hansen paused."No,
I'm not a pirate. At least, not yet."Hansen put down his cup and looked
troubled. "I don't understand. Perhaps I've said things I shouldn't
have.""Don't worry about it. I'm going to be one of them soon
enough."Lucky finished his coffee and then, choosing his words
carefully, began with his boarding of the Atlas 0 on the Moon and
carried it through to the moment.Hansen listened in absorption. "And are
you sure this is what you want to do, young man, now that you've seen a
little of what the life is like?"'abT'bb "Im sure."Why, for Earth's
sake?""Exactly. For the sake of Earth and what it did to me. It's no
place to live. Why did you 0 come out here?""It's a long story, I'm
afraid. You needn't look alarmed. I won't tell it. I bought this
asteroid long ago as a place for small vacations, and I grew to like it.
I kept enlarging the room space, brought furniture and book films from
Earth little by little. Eventually I found I had all I needed here. So
why not stay here permanently? I asked myself. And I did stay here
permanently.""Sure. Why not? You're smart. Back there it's a mess. Too
many people. Too many rut jobs. Next to impossible to get out to the
planets, and if you do, it means a job of manual labor. No opportunity
for a man any more unless he comes to the asteroids. I'm not old enough
to settle70 LUCKY STARRdown like you. But for a young fellow it's a free
life and an exciting one. There's room to be boss.""The ones who are
already boss don't like young fellows with boss notions in their head.
Anton, for instance. I've seen him and I know.""Maybe, but so far he's
kept his word," said Lucky. "He said if I came out winner over this
Dingo, I'd have my chance to join the men of the asteroids. It looks as
though I'm getting the chance.""It looks as though you're here, that's
all. What if he returns with proof, or what he calls proof, that you're
a government man.""tt >i_ ?>He won t."And if he does? Just to get rid of
you?"Lucky's face darkened and again Hansen looked at him curiously,
frowning a bit.Lucky said, "He wouldn't. He can use a good man and he
knows it. Besides, why are you preaching to me? You're out here yourself
playing ball with them."Hansen looked down. "It's true. I shouldn't
interfere with you. It's just that being alone here so long, I'm apt to
talk too much when a person does come along, just to hear the sound of
voices. Look, it's about time for dinner. I would be glad to have you
eat with me in silence, if you'd rather. Or else we'll talk about
anything you choose.""Well, thanks, Mr. Hansen. No hard
feelings.""Good."Lucky followed Hansen through a door into a small
pantry lined with canned food and concentrates of all sorts. None of the
brand names familiar to Lucky wereWHAT THE HERMIT KNEW 71represented.
Instead the contents of each can were described in brightly colored
etchings that were themselves integral parts of the metal.Hansen said,
"I used to keep fresh meat in a special freeze room. You can get the
temperature down all the way on an asteroid, you know, but it's been two
years since I could get that kind of supplies."He chose half a dozen
cans off the shelves, plus a container of milk concentrate. At his
suggestion Lucky took up a sealed gallon container of water from a lower
shelf.The hermit set the table quickly. The cans were of the
self-heating type that opened up into dishes with enclosed
cutlery.Hansen said, with some amusement, indicating the cans, "I've got
a whole valley on the outside brim-filled with these things. Discarded
ones, that is. A twenty years' accumulation."The food was good, but
strange. It was yeast-base material, the kind only the Terrestrial
Empire produced. Nowhere else in the Galaxy was the pressure of
population so great, the billions of people so numerous, that yeast
culture had been developed. On Venus, where most of the yeast products
were grown, almost any variety of food imitation could be produced:
steaks, nuts, butter, candy. It was as nourishing as the real thing,
too. To Lucky, however, the flavor was not quite Venusian. There was a
sharper tang to it."Pardon me for being nosy," he said, "but all this
takes money, doesn't it?""Oh yes, and I have some. I have investments on
Earth.72 LUCKY STARRQuite good ones. My checks are always honored, or at
least they were until not quite two years ago.""What happened then?""The
supply ships stopped coming. Too risky on account of the pirates. It was
a bad blow. I had a good backlog of supplies in most things, but I can
imagine how it must have been for the others.""The others?""The other
hermits. There are hundreds of us. They're not all as lucky as I am.
Very few can afford to make their worlds quite this comfortable, but
they can manage the essentials. It's usually old people like myself,
with wives dead, children grown up, the world strange and different, who
go off by themselves. If they have a little nest egg, they can get a
little asteroid started. The government doesn't charge. Any asteroid you
want to settle on, if it's less than five miles in diameter, is yours.
Then if they want they can invest in a sub-etheric receiver and keep up
with the universe. If not, they can have book films, or can arrange to
have news transcripts brought in by the supply ships once a year, or
they can just eat, rest, sleep, and wait to die if they'd rather. I
wish, sometimes, I'd got to know some of them.""Why haven't
you?""Sometimes I've felt willing, but they're not easy people to know.
After all, they've come here to be alone, and for that matter, so have
I.""Well, what did you do when the supply ships stopped coming?""Nothing
at first. I thought surely the government would clean up the situation
and I had enough suppliesWHAT THE HERMIT KNEW 73for months. In fact, I
could have skimped along for a year, maybe. But then the pirate ships
came.""And you threw in with them?"The hermit shrugged. His eyebrows
drew together in a troubled frown and they finished their meal in
silence.At the end he gathered the can plates and cutlery and placed
them in a wall container in the alcove that led to the pantry. Lucky
heard a dim grating noise of metal on metal that diminished
rapidly.Hansen said, "The pseudo-grav field doesn't extend to the
disposal tube. A puff of air and they sail out to the valley I told you
of, even though it's nearly a mile away.""It seems to me," said Lucky,
"that if you'd try a little harder ptaff, you'd get rid of the cans
altogether.""So I would. I think most hermits do that. Maybe they all
do. I don't like the idea, though. It's a waste of air, and of metal
too. We might reclaim those cans someday. Who knows? Besides even though
most of the cans would scatter here and there, I'm sure that some would
circle this asteroid like little moons and it's undignified to think of
being accompanied on your orbit by your garbage. . . . Care to smoke?
No? Mind if I do?"He lit a cigar and with a contented sigh went on. "The
men of the asteroids can't supply tobacco regularly, so this is becoming
a rare treat for me."Lucky said, "Do they furnish you the rest of your
supplies?""That's right. Water, machine parts and power-pack renewals.
It's an arrangement.""And what do you do for them?"The hermit studied
his cigar's lighted end. "Not much.74 LUCKY STARRThey use this world.
They land their ships on it and I don't report them. They don't come in
here and what they do elsewhere on the rock isn't my business. I don't
want to know. It's safer that way. Men are left here sometimes, like
yourself, and are picked up later. I have an idea they stop for minor
repairs sometimes. They bring me supplies in return.""Do they supply all
the hermits?""I wouldn't know. Maybe.""It would take an awful lot of
supplies. Where would they get them from?""They capture ships.""Not
enough to supply hundreds of hermits and 0 themselves. iSnean, it would
take an awful lot of ships.""I wouldn't know.""Aren't you interested?
It's a soft life you have here, but maybe the food we just ate came off
a ship whose crew are frozen corpses circling some other asteroid like
human garbage. Do you ever think of that?"The hermit flushed painfully.
"You're getting your revenge for my having preached to you earlier.
You're right, but what can I do? I didn't abandon or betray the
government. They abandoned and betrayed me. My estate on Earth pays
taxes. Why am I not protected then? I registered this asteroid with the
Terrestrial Outer World Bureau in good faith. It's part of the
Terrestrial dominion. I have every right to expect protection against
the pirates. If that's not forthcoming; if my source of supply coolly
says that they can bring me nothing more at any price, what am I
supposed to do?"You might say I could have returned to Earth, butWHAT
THE HERMIT KNEW 75how could I abandon all this? I have a world of my own
here. My book films, the great classics that I love. I even have a copy
of Shakespeare; a direct filming of the actual pages of an ancient
printed book. I have food, drink, privacy. I could find nowhere as
comfortable as this anywhere else in the Universe."Don't think it's been
an easy choice, though. I have a sub-etheric transmitter. I could
communicate with Earth. I've got a little ship that can make the short
haul to Ceres. The men of the asteroids know that, but they trust me.
They know I have no choice. As I told you when we first met, I'm an
accessory after the fact."I've helped them. That makes me legally a
pirate. It would be jail, execution, probably, if I return. If not, if
they free me provided I turn state's evidence, the men of the asteroids
won't forget. They would find me no matter where I went, unless I could
be guaranteed complete government protection for life.""It looks like
you're in a bad way," said Lucky."Am I?" said the hermit. "I might be
able to get that complete protection with the proper help."It was
Lucky's turn. "I wouldn't know," he said."I think you would."I 0 don t
get you."Look, I'll give you a word of warning in return for
help.""There's nothing Z can do. What's your word?""Get off the asteroid
before Anton and his men come back.""Not on your life. I came here to
join them, not to go home."76 LUCKY STARR"If you don't leave, you'll
stay forever. You'll stay as a dead man. They won't let you on any crew.
You won't qualify, mister."Lucky's face twisted in anger. "What in space
are you talking about, old-timer?""There it is again. When you get
angry, I see it plainly. You're not Bill Williams, son. What's your
relationship to Lawrence Starr of the Council of Science? Are you
Starr's son?"CHAPTER 7TO CERESLucky's eyes narrowed. He felt the muscles
of his right arm tense as though to reach for a hip at which no blaster
nestled. He made no actual motion.His voice remained under strict
control. He said, "Whose son? What are you talking about?""I'm sure of
it." The hermit leaned forward, seizing Lucky's wrist earnestly. "I knew
Lawrence Starr well. He was my friend. He helped me once when I needed
help. And you're his image. I couldn't be wrong."Lucky pulled his hand
away. "You're not making sense.""Listen, son, it may be important to you
not to give away your identity. Maybe you don't trust me. All right, I'm
not telling you to trust me. I've been working with the pirates and I've
admitted it. But listen to me anyway. The men of the asteroids have a
good organization. It may take them weeks, but if Anton suspects you,
they won't stop till you're checked from the ground up. No phony story
will fool them. They'll get the truth and they'll learn who you are. Be
sure of that! They'll get your true identity. Leave, I tell you.
Leave!"Lucky said, "If I were this guy you say I am, old-timer, aren't
you getting yourself into trouble? I take it you want me to use your
ship."78 LUCKY STARR"Yes.""And what would you 0 do when the pirates
returned?""I wouldn't be here. Don't you see? I want to go with
you.""And leave all you have here?"The old man hesitated. "Yes, it's
hard. But I won't have a chance like this again. You're a man of
influence; you must be. You're a member of the Council of Science,
perhaps. You're here on secret work. They'll believe you. You could
protect me, vouch for me. You would prevent prosecution, see that no
harm came to me from the pirates. It would pay the Council, young man. I
would tell them all I know about the pirates. I would co-operate in
every way I could."Lucky said, "Where do you keep your ship?""It's a
deal, then?""I'm just asking to see your ship."432 _ _432 The ship was a
small one indeed. The two reached it through a narrow corridor, walking
single file, their figures grotesque again in space-suits.Lucky said,
"Is Ceres close enough to pick out by ship's telescope?""Yes
indeed.""You could recognize it without trouble?""Certainly.""Let's get
on board, then."The fore end of the airless cavern that housed the ship
opened outward as soon as the ship's motors were activated."Radio
control," explained Hansen.TO CERES 79The ship was fueled and
provisioned. It worked smoothly, rising out of its berth and into space
with the ease and freedom possible only where gravitational forces were
virtually lacking. For the first time Lucky saw Hansen's asteroid from
space. He caught a glimpse of the valley of the discarded cans, brighter
than the surrounding rock, just before it passed into shadow.Hansen
said, "Tell me, now. You are the son of Lawrence Starr, aren't
you?"Lucky had located a well-charged blaster and a holster belt to
boot. He was strapping it on as he spoke."My name," he said, "is David
Starr. Most people call me Lucky."432 _ _432 Ceres is a monster among
the asteroids. It is nearly five hundred miles in diameter, and,
standing upon it, the average man actually weighs two full pounds. It is
quite spherical in shape, and anyone very close to it in space could
easily think it a respectable planet.Still, if the Earth were hollow, it
would be possible to throw into it four thousand bodies the size of
Ceres before filling it up.Bigman stood on the surface of Ceres, his
figure bloated in a space-suit which had been loaded to bursting with
lead weights and on shoes the soles of which were foot-thick lead clogs.
It had been his own idea, but it was quite useless. He still weighed
less than four pounds and his every motion threatened to twist him up
into space.He had been on Ceres for days now, since the quick space
flight with Conway and Henree from the Moon,80 LUCKY STARRwaiting for
this moment, waiting for Lucky Starr to send in the radio message that
he was coming in. Gus Henree and Hector Conway had been nervous about
it, fearing Lucky's death, worrying about it. He, Bigman, had known
better. Lucky could come through anything. He told them that. When
Lucky's message finally came, he told them again.But just the same, out
here on Ceres' frozen soil with nothing between himself and the stars,
he admitted a sneaking sensation of relief.From where he sat he was
looking directly at the dome of the Observatory, its lower reaches
dipping just a little below the close horizon. It was the largest
observatory in the Terrestrial Empire for a very logical reason.In that
part of the Solar System inside the orbit of Jupiter, the planets Venus,
Earth, and Mars had atmospheres and were by that very fact poorly suited
for astronomic observation. The interfering air, even when it was as
thin as that of Mars, blotted out the finer detail. It wavered and
flickered star images and spoiled things generally.The largest airless
object inside Jupiter's orbit was Mercury, but that was so close to the
Sun that the observatory in its twilight zone specialized in solar
observations. Relatively small telescopes sufficed.The second largest
airless object was the Moon. Here again circumstances dictated
specialization. Weather forecasts on Earth, for instance, had become an
accurate, long-range science, since the appearance of Earth's atmosphere
could be viewed as a whole from a distance of a quarter of a million
miles.TO CERES 81And the third largest airless object was Ceres, and
that was the best of the three. Its almost nonexistent gravity allowed
huge lenses and mirrors to be poured without the danger of breakage,
without even the question of sag, due to its own weight. The structure
of the telescope tube itself needed no particular strength. Ceres was
nearly three times as far from the Sun as was the Moon and sunlight was
only one eighth as strong. Its rapid revolution kept Ceres' temperature
almost constant. In short, Ceres was ideal for observation of the stars
and of the outer planets.Only the day before Bigman had seen Saturn
through the thousand-inch reflecting telescope, the grinding of the huge
mirror having consumed twenty years of painstaking and continuous
labor."What do I look through?" he had asked.They laughed at him. "You
don't look through anything," they said.They worked the controls
carefully, three of them, each doing something that co-ordinated with
the other two, until all were satisfied. The dim red lights dimmed
further and in the pit of black emptiness about which they sat a blob of
light sprang into being. A touch at the controls and it focused
sharply.Bigman whistled his astonishment. It was Saturn!It was Saturn,
three feet wide, exactly as he had seen it from space half a dozen
times. Its triple rings were bright and he could see three marble-like
moons. Behind it was a numerous dusting of stars. Bigman wanted to walk
about it to see how it looked with the night82 LUCKY STARRshadow cutting
it, but the picture didn't change as he moved."It's just an image," they
told him, "an illusion. You see the same thing no matter where you
stand."Now, from the asteroid's surface, Bigman could spot Saturn with
the naked eye. It was just a white dot, but brighter than the other
white dots that were the stars. It was twice as bright as it appeared
from Earth, since it was two hundred million miles closer here. Earth
itself was on the other side of Ceres near the pea-size Sun. Earth
wasn't a very impressive sight, since the Sun invariably dwarfed
it.Bigman's helmet suddenly rang with sound as the call flooded his
left-open radio receiver."Hey, Shortie, get moving. There's a ship
coming in."Bigman jumped at the noise and moved straight upward, limbs
flailing. He yelled, "Who're you calling Shortie?"But the other was
laughing. "Hey, how much do you charge for flying lessons, little
boy?""I'll little boy you," screamed Bigman furiously. He had reached
the peak of his parabola and was slowly and hesitatingly beginning to
settle downward once more. "What's your name, wise guy? Say your name,
and I'll crack your gizzard as soon as I get back and peel the..
?>suit."Think you can reach my gizzard?" came the mocking rejoinder, and
Bigman would have exploded into tiny pieces if he had not caught sight
of a ship slanting down from the horizon.He loped in giant, clumsy
strides about the leveledTO CERES 83square mile of ground that was the
asteroid's space-port, trying to judge the exact spot on which the ship
would land.It dropped down its steaming jets to a feather-touch
planetary contact and when the air-locks opened and Lucky's tall, suited
figure emerged, Bigman, yelling his joy, made one long leap of it, and
they were together.432 _ _432 Conway and Henree were less effusive in
their welcome, but no less joyful. Each wrung Lucky's hand as though to
confirm, by sheer muscular pressure, the reality of the flesh and blood
they beheld.Lucky laughed. "Whoa, will you? Give me a chance to breathe.
What's the matter? Didn't you think I was coming back?""Look here," said
Conway, "you'd better consult us before you take off on just any old
fool notion.""Well, now, not if it's too much of a fool notion, please,
or you won't let me.""Never mind that. I can ground you for what you've
done. I can have you put under detention right now. I can suspend you. I
can throw you off the Council," said Conway."Which of them are you going
to do?""None of them, you darned overgrown young fool. But I may 0 beat
your brains out one of these days."Lucky turned to Augustus Henree. "You
won't let him, will you?""Frankly, I'll help him.""Then I give up in
advance. Look, there's a gentleman here I'd like to have you meet."84
LUCKY STARRUntil now Hansen had remained in the background, obviously
amused by the interchange of nonsense. The two older Councilmen had been
too full of Lucky Starr even to be aware of his existence."Dr. Conway,"
said Lucky, "Dr. Henree, this is Mr. Joseph P. Hansen, the man whose
ship I used to come back. He has been of considerable assistance to
me."The old hermit shook hands with the two scientists."I don't suppose
you can possibly know Drs. Conway and Henree," said Lucky. The hermit
shook his head."Well," he went on, "they're important officials in the
Council of Science. After you've eaten and had a chance to rest, they'll
talk to you and help you, I'm sure."432 _ _432 An hour later the two
Councilmen faced Lucky with somber expressions. Dr. Henree tamped
tobacco into his pipe with a little finger, and smoked quietly as he
listened to Lucky's accounts of his adventures with the pirates."Have
you told this to Bigman?" he asked."I've just spent some time talking to
him," said Lucky."And he didn't assault you for not taking him?""He
wasn't pleased," Lucky admitted.But Conway's mind was more seriously
oriented. "A Sirian-designed ship, eh?" he mused."Undoubtedly so," said
Lucky. "At least we have that piece of information.""The information
wasn't worth the risk," said Conway, dryly. "I'm much more disturbed
over another piece of information we have now. It's obvious that the
Sirian organization penetrates into the Council of Science itself."TO
CERES 85Henree nodded gravely. "Yes, I saw that, too. Very bad."Lucky
said, "How do you make that out?""Galaxy, boy, it's obvious," growled
Conway. "I'll admit that we had a large construction crew working on the
ship and that even with the best intentions careless slips of
information can take place. It remains truth, though, that the fact of
the booby-trapping and particularly the exact manner of the fusing were
known only to Council members and not too many of those. Somewhere in
that small group is a spy, yet I could have sworn that all were
faithful." He shook his head. "I still can't believe otherwise.""You
don't have to," said Lucky."Oh? And why not?""Because the Sirian contact
was quite temporary. The Sirian Embassy got their information from me"0
CHAPTER 8BIGMAN TAKES OVER"Indirectly, of course, through one of their
known spies," he amplified, as the two older men stared at him in
shocked astonishment."I don't understand you at all," said Henree in a
low voice. Conway was obviously speechless."It was necessary. I had to
introduce myself to the pirates without suspicion. If they found me on
what they thought was a mapping ship, they would have shot me out of
hand. On the other hand, if they found me on a booby-trapped ship the
secret of which they had stumbled on by what seemed a stroke of fortune,
they would have taken me at face value as a stowaway. Don't you see? On
a mapping ship I'm only a member of the crew that didn't get away in
time. On a booby trap, I'm a poor jerk who didn't realize what he was
stowing away on.""They might have shot you anyway. They might have seen
through your double-cross and considered you a spy. In fact, they almost
did.""True! They almost did," admitted Lucky.Conway finally exploded.
"And what about the original plan. Were we or were we not going to
explode one of their bases? When I consider the months we spent on the
construction of the Atlas, 0 the money that went into it----"88 LUCKY
STARR"What good would it have done to explode one of their bases? We
spoke about a huge hangar of pirate ships, but actually that was only
wishful thinking. An organization based upon the asteroids would have to
be decentralized. The pirates probably don't have more than three or
four ships in any one place. There wouldn't be room for more. Exploding
three or four ships would mean very little compared with what would have
been accomplished if I had succeeded in penetrating their
organization.""But you didn't succeed," said Conway. "With all your fool
risks, you didn't succeed.""Unfortunately the pirate captain who took
the Atlas 0 was too suspicious, or perhaps too intelligent for us. I'll
try not to underestimate them again. But it's not all loss. We know for
a fact that Sirius is behind them. In addition, we have my hermit
friend.""He won't help us," said Conway. "From what you've said about
him, it sounds as though he were only interested in having as little to
do with the pirates as possible. So what can he know?""He may be able to
tell us more than he himself thinks is possible," said Lucky coolly.
"For instance, there's one piece of information he can give us that will
enable me to continue efforts at working against piracy from the
inside.""You're not going out there again," said Conway hastily."I don't
intend to," said Lucky.Conway's eyes narrowed. "Where's Bigman?""On
Ceres. Don't worry. In fact," and a shadow crossedBIGMAN TAKES OVER
89Lucky's face, "he should be here by now. The delay is beginning to
bother me a little."432 _ _432 John Bigman Jones used his special pass
card to get past the guard at the door to the Control Tower. He was
muttering to himself as he half-ran along the corridors.The slight flush
on his pug-nosed face dimmed his freckles and his reddish hair stood up
in tufts like fence pickets. Lucky had frequently told him he cultivated
a vertical hair-do to make himself look taller, but he always denied
that vigorously.The final door to the Tower swung open as he broke the
photoelectric beam. He stepped inside and looked about.Three men were on
duty. One with earphones sat at the sub-etheric receiver, another was at
the calculating machine and the third was at the curved radarized
visi-plate.Bigman said, "Which one of you knotbrains called me
Shortie?"The three turned toward him in unison, their faces startled and
scowling.The man with the earphones pulled one away from his left ear.
"Who in space are you? How the dickens did you get in here?"Bigman stood
erect and puffed out his small chest. "My name is John Bigman Jones. My
friends call me Bigman. Everyone else calls me Mr. Jones. Nobody calls
me Shortie and stays in one piece. I want to know which one of you made
that mistake."The man with the earphones said, "My name is Lem90 LUCKY
STARRFisk and you can call me anything you blame please as long as you
do it somewhere else. Get out of here, or I'll come down, pick you up by
one leg, and toss you out."The fellow at the calculating machine said,
"Hey, Lem, that's the crackpot who was haunting the port a while back.
There's no point in wasting time on him. Get the guards to throw him
out.""Nuts," said Lem Fisk, "we don't need guards for thatguy." He took
off his earphones altogether and set the sub-etherics at automatic
signal. He said, "Well, son, you came in here and asked us a nice
question in a nice way. I'll give you a nice answer. I called you
Shortie, but wait, don't get mad. I had a reason. You see you're such a
real tall fellow. You're such a long drink of water. You're such a
high-pockets. It makes my friends laugh to hear me call you Shortie."He
reached into his hip pocket and drew out a plastic container of
cigarettes. The smile on his face was bland."Come down here," yelled
Bigman. "Come down here and back up your sense of humor with a couple of
fists.""Temper, temper," said Fisk, clucking his tongue. "Here, boy,
have a cigarette. King-size, you know. Almost as long as you are. Liable
to create some confusion, though, come to think of it. We won't be able
to tell whether you're smoking the cigarette or the cigarette is smoking
you."The other two Tower men laughed vigorously.Bigman was a passionate
red. Words came thickly to his tongue. "You won't fight?""I'd rather
smoke. Pity you don't join me." Fisk leanedBIGMAN TAKES OVER 91back,
chose a cigarette, and held it before his face as though admiring its
slim whiteness. "After all, I can't be bothered to fight children."He
grinned, brought his cigarette to his lips, and found them closing on
nothingness.His thumb and first two fingers still held their positions
about three eighths of an inch apart, but there was no cigarette between
them."Watch out, Lem," cried the man at the visiplate. "He has a
needle-gun.""No needle-gun," snarled Bigman. "Just a buzzer."There was
an important difference. A buzzer's projectiles, although needle-like,
were fragile and nonexplo-sive. They were used for target practice and
small game. Striking human skin, a buzz needle would do no serious
damage, but it would smart like the devil.Fisk's grin disappeared
completely. He yelled, "Watch that, you crazy fool. You can blind a man
with that."Bigman's fist remained clenched at eye level. The thin snout
of the buzzer projected between his two middle fingers. He said, "I
won't blind you. But I can fix it so you won't sit down for a month. And
as you can see, my aim isn't bad. And you," 0 he called over his
shoulder to the one at the calculator, "if you move an inch closer to
the alarm circuit, you'll have a buzz needle right through your
hand."Fisk said, "What do you want?""Come down here and fight.""Against
a buzzer?""I'll put it away. Fists. Fair fight. Your buddies can see to
that."92 LUCKY STARR"I can't hit a guy smaller than I am.""Then you
shouldn't insult him, either." Bigman brought up the buzzer. "And I'm
not smaller than you are. I may look that way on the outside, but inside
I'm as big as you. Maybe bigger. I'm counting three." He narrowed one
eye as he aimed."Galaxy!" swore Fisk. "I'm coming down. Fellas, be my
witness that this was forced on me. I'll try not to hurt the crazy idiot
too much."He leaped down from his perch. The man at the calculating
machine took his place at the sub-etherics.Fisk was five feet ten, eight
inches taller than Bigman, whose slight figure was more like a boy's
than a man's. But Bigman's muscles were steel springs under perfect
control. He awaited the other's approach without expression.Fisk did not
bother to put up a guard. He simply extended his right hand as though he
were going to lift Bigman by the collar and toss him through the still
open door.Bigman ducked under the arm. His left and right thudded into
the larger man's solar plexus in a rapid one-two, and almost in the same
instant he danced out of reach.Fisk turned green and sat down, holding
his stomach and groaning."Stand up, big boy," said Bigman. "I'll wait
for you."The other two Tower men seemed frozen into immobility by the
sudden turn of events.Slowly Fisk rose to his feet. His face glowed with
rage, but he approached more slowly.BIGMAN TAKES OVER 93Bigman drifted
away.Fisk lunged! Bigman was not there by two inches. Fisk whipped a
sharp overhand right. It's thrust ended an inch short of Bigman's
jaw.Bigman bobbed about like a cork on rippling water. His arms lifted
occasionally to deflect a blow.Fisk, yelling incoherently, rushed
blindly at his gnat-like opponent. Bigman stepped to one side and his
open hand slapped sharply at the other's smooth-shaven cheek. It hit
with a sharp report, like a meteor hitting the first layers of dense air
above a planet. The marks of four fingers were outlined in red on Fisk's
face.For a moment Fisk stood there, dazed. Like a striking snake, Bigman
stepped in again, his fists moving upward to crack against Fisk's jaw.
Fisk went down into a half crouch.Distantly Bigman was suddenly aware of
the steady ringing of the alarm.Without a moment's hesitation he turned
on his heel and was out the door. He wove through a startled trio of
guards heading up the corridor at a clattering run, and was gone!432 _
_432 "And why," questioned Conway, "are we waiting for Bigman?"Lucky
said, "Here's the way I see the situation. There is nothing we need so
badly as more information about the pirates. I mean inside information.
I tried to get it and things didn't quite break the way I hoped they
would. I'm a marked man now. They know me. But they don't know Bigman.
He has no official connection with94 LUCKY STARRthe Council. Now it's my
idea that if we can trump up a criminal charge against him, for realism,
you know, he can hightail it out of Ceres in the hermit's ship----""Oh,
space," groaned Conway."Listen, will you! He'll go back to the hermit's
asteroid. If the pirates are there, good! If not, he'll leave the ship
in plain view and wait for them inside. It's a very comfortable place to
wait in.""And when they come," said Henree, "they'll shoot him.""They
will not. 0 That's why he's taking the hermit's ship. They'll have to
know where Hansen went, to say nothing of myself, where Bigman came
from, how he got hold of the ship. They'll have 0 to know. That will
give him time to talk.""And to explain how he picked out Hansen's
asteroid out of all the rocks in creation? That would take some tall
talking.""That won't take any talking at all. The hermit's ship was on
Ceres, which it is. I've arranged to leave it out there unguarded, so he
can take it. He'll find the ship's home asteroid's space-time
co-ordinates in the logbook. It would just be an asteroid to him, not
too far from Ceres, as good as any other, and he would make a beeline
for it in order to wait for the furor on Ceres to die down.""It's a
risk," grumbled Conway."Bigman knows it. And I tell you right now, we've
got 0 to take risks. Earth is underestimating the pirate menace so badly
that----"He interrupted himself as the signal light of the Com-mum-tube
flashed on and off in rapid dots of light.BIGMAN TAKES OVER 95Conway,
with an impatient motion of his hand, cut in the signal analyzer, then
sat up straight.He said, "It's on the Council wave length and, by Ceres,
it's one of the Council scramblings."The small visiplate above the
Communi-tube was showing a characteristic rapidly shifting pattern of
light and dark.Conway inserted a sliver of metal, which he took from a
group of such in his wallet, into a narrow slot in the Communi-tube. The
sliver was a crystallite unscrambler, the active portion of the gadget
consisting of a particular pattern of tiny crystals of tungsten embedded
in an aluminum matrix. It filtered the sub-etheric signal in a specific
way. Slowly Conway adjusted the unscrambler, pushing it in deeper and
extracting it again until it matched exactly a scrambler, similar in
nature but opposite in function, at the other end of the signal.The
moment of complete adjustment was heralded by the sudden sharp focusing
of the visiplate.Lucky half-rose to his feet. "Bigman!" he said. "Where
in space are you?"Bigman's little face was grinning puckishly out at
them. "I'm in space all right. A hundred thousand miles off Ceres. I'm
in the hermit's ship."Conway whispered furiously, "Is this another of
your tricks? I thought you said he was on Ceres?""I thought he was,"
Lucky said. Then, "What happened, Bigman?""You said we had to act
quickly, so I fixed things up myself. One of the wise guys in the
Control Tower was giving me the business. So I slammed him around a
little96 LUCKY STARRand took off." He laughed. "Check the guardhouse and
see if they're not on the lookout for a guy like me with a complaint of
assault and battery against him.""That wasn't the brightest thing you
could have done," said Lucky gravely. "You'll have a hard time
convincing the men of the asteroids that you're the type for assault. I
don't want to hurt your feelings, but you look a little small for the
job.""I'll knock down a few," Bigman retorted. "They'll believe me. But
that's not why I called.""Well, why did you?""How do I get to this guy's
asteroid?"Lucky frowned. "Have you looked in the logbook?""Great Galaxy!
I've looked everywhere. I've looked under the mattress even. There's no
record anywhere of any kind of co-ordinates."Lucky's look of uneasiness
grew. "That's strange. In fact it's worse than strange. Look, Bigman,"
he spoke rapidly and incisively, "match Ceres' speed. Give me your
co-ordinates with respect to Ceres right now and keep them that way,
whatever you do, till I call you. You're too close to Ceres now for any
pirates to bother you, but if you drift out further, you may be in a bad
way. Do you hear me?""Check. Got you. Let me calculate my
co-ordinates."Lucky wrote them down and broke connections. He said,
"Space, when will I learn not 0 to make assumptions."Henree said,
"Hadn't you better have Bigman come back? It's a foolhardy setup at best
and as long as you haven't the co-ordinates, give the whole thing
up.""Give it up?" said Lucky. "Give up the one asteroidBIGMAN TAKES OVER
97we know to be a pirates' base? Do you know of any other? One single
other? We've got to find the asteroid. It's our only clue to the inside
of this knot."Conway said, "He's got a point there, Gus. It is a
base."Lucky jiggled a switch on the intercom briskly and waited.Hansen's
voice, sleep-filled but startled, said, "Hello! Hello!"Lucky said
briskly, "This is Lucky Starr, Mr. Hansen. Sorry to disturb you, but I
would like to have you come down here to Dr. Conway's room as fast as
you can."The hermit's voice answered after a pause, "Certainly, but I
don't know the way.""The guard at your door will take you. I'll contact
him. Can you make it in two minutes?""Two and a half anyway," he said,
good-humoredly. He sounded more awake."Good enough!"Hansen was as good
as his word. Lucky was waiting for him.Lucky paused for a moment,
holding the door open. He said to the guard, "Has there been any trouble
at the base earlier this evening? An assault, perhaps?"The guard looked
surprised. "Yes, sir. The man who got hurt refused to press charges,
though. Claimed it was a fair fight."Lucky closed the door. He said,
"That follows. Any normal man would hate to get up in a guardhouse and
admit a fellow the size of Bigman had given him a banging. I'll call the
authorities later and have them put98 LUCKY STARRthe charge on paper
anyway. For the record. . , . Mr. Hansen.""Yes, Mr. Starr?""I have a
question the answer to which I did not want floating around the intercom
system. Tell me, what are the co-ordinates of your home asteroid.
Standard and temporal both, of course."Hansen stared and his china-blue
eyes grew round. "Well, you may find this hard to believe, but do you
know, I really couldn't tell you."CHAPTER 9THE ASTEROID THAT WASN'TLucky
met his eye steadily. "That is hard to believe, Mr. Hansen. I should
think you would know your coordinates as well as a planet dweller would
know his home address."The hermit looked at his toes and said mildly, "I
suppose so. It is 0 my home address, really. Yet I don't know it."Conway
said, "If this man is deliberately-"Lucky broke in. "Now wait. Let's
force patience on ourselves if we have to. Mr. Hansen must have some
explanation."They waited for the hermit to speak.Co-ordinates of the
various bodies in the Galaxy were the lifeblood of space travel. They
fulfilled the same function that lines of latitude and longitude did on
the two-dimensional surface of a planet. However, since space is three
dimensional, and since the bodies in it move about in every possible
way, the necessary coordinates are more complicated.Basically there is
first a standard zero position. In the case of the Solar System, the Sun
was the usual standard. Based on that standard, three numbers are
necessary. The first number is the distance of an object or a position
in space from the Sun. The second and third numbers are100 LUCKY
STARRtwo angular measurements indicating the position of the object with
reference to an imaginary line connecting the Sun and the center of the
Galaxy. If three sets of such co-ordinates are known for three different
times, set well apart, the orbit of a moving body could be calculated
and its position, relative to the Sun, known for any given time.Ships
could calculate their own co-ordinates with respect to the Sun or, if it
were more convenient, with respect to the nearest large body, whatever
it was. On the Lunar Lines, for instance, of which vessels traveled from
Earth to the Moon and back, Earth was the customary "zero point." The
Sun's own co-ordinates could be calculated with respect to the Galactic
Center and the Galactic Prime Meridian, but that was only important in
traveling between the stars.Some of all this might have been passing
through the hermit's mind as he sat there with the three Councilmen
watching him narrowly. It was hard to tell.Hansen said suddenly, "Yes, I
can explain.""We're waiting," said Lucky."I've never had occasion to use
the co-ordinates in fifteen years. I haven't left my asteroid at all for
two years and before that any trips I made, maybe one or two a year,
were short ones to Ceres or Vesta for supplies of one sort or another.
When I did that, I used local coordinates which I always calculated out
for the moment. I never worked out a table because I didn't have to."I'd
only be gone a day or two, three at the most, and my own rock wouldn't
drift far in that time. It travels with the stream, a little slower than
Ceres or Vesta whenTHE ASTEROID THAT WASN'T 101it's further from the Sun
and a little faster when it's nearer. When I'd head back for the
position I calculated, my rock might have drifted ten thousand or even a
hundred thousand miles off its original spot, but it was always close
enough to pick up with the ship's telescope. After that, I could always
adjust my course by eye. I never used the solar standard co-ordinates
because I never had to, and there it is.""What you're saying," said
Lucky, "is that you couldn't get back to your rock now. Or did you
calculate its local co-ordinates before you left?""I never thought to,"
said the hermit sadly ."It's been so long since I left it that I never
gave the matter a second's attention. Not until the minute you called me
in here."Dr. Henree said, "Wait. Wait." He had lit up a fresh pipeful of
tobacco and was puffing strongly. "I may be wrong, Mr. Hansen, but when
you first took over ownership of your asteroid, you must have filed a
claim with the Terrestrial Outer World Bureau. Is that right?""Yes,"
said Hansen, "but it was only a formality.""That could be. I'm not
arguing that. Still, the coordinates of your asteroid would be on record
there."Hansen thought a bit, then shook his head. "I'm afraid not, Dr.
Henree. They took only the standard co-ordinate set for January 1 of
that year. That was just to identify the asteroid, like a code number,
in case of disputed ownership. They weren't interested in anything more
than that and you can't compute an orbit from only one set of
numbers.""But you yourself must have had orbital values. Lucky102 LUCKY
STARRtold us that you first used the asteroid as an annual vacation
spot. So you must have been able to find it from year to year.""That was
fifteen years ago, Dr. Henree. I had 0 the values, yes. And those values
are somewhere in my record books on the rock, but they're not in my
memory."Lucky, his brown eyes clouded, said, "There's nothing else at
the moment, Mr. Hansen. The guard will take you back to the room and
we'll let you know when we need you again. And, Mr. Hansen," he added as
the hermit rose, "if you should happen to think of the co-ordinates, let
us know.""My word on that, Mr. Starr," said Hansen gravely.The three
were alone again. Lucky's hand shot out to the Communi-tube. "Key me in
for transmission," he said.The voice of the man at Central
Communications came back. "Was the previous incoming message for you,
sir? I couldn't unscramble it so I thought----""You did well.
Transmission, please."Lucky adjusted a scrambler and used Bigman's
coordinates to zero in the sub-etheric beam."Bigman," he said when the
other's face appeared, "open the logbook again.""Do you have the
co-ordinates, Lucky?""Not yet. Have you got the logbook open?""Yes.""Is
there a sheet of scrap paper somewhere in it? Loose, with calculations
all over it?""Wait. Yes. Here it is."THE ASTEROID THAT WASN'T 103"Hold
it up in front of your transmitter. I want to see it."Lucky pulled a
sheet of paper before him and copied down the figuring. "All right,
Bigman, take it away. Now listen, stay put. Get me? Stay put, no matter
what, till you hear from me. Signing off."He turned to the two older
men. "I navigated the ship from the hermit's rock to Ceres by eye. I
adjusted course three or four times, using his ship's telescope and
vernier instruments for observation and measurements. These are my
calculations."Conway nodded. "Now, I suppose, you intend calculating
backwards to find out the rock's co-ordinates.""It can be done easily
enough, particularly if we make use of the Ceres Observatory."Conway
rose heavily. "I can't help but think you make too much of all this, but
I'll follow your instinct for a while. Let's go to the Observatory."432
_ _432 Corridors and elevators took them close to Ceres' surface, one
half mile above the Council of Science offices on the asteroid. It was
chilly there, since the Observatory made every attempt to keep the
temperature as constant as possible and as near surface temperature as
the human body could endure.Slowly and carefully a young technician was
unraveling Lucky's calculations, feeding them into the computer and
controlling the operations.Dr. Henree, in a not too comfortable chair,
huddled his thin body together and seemed to be trying to extract104
LUCKY STARRwarmth from his pipe, for his large-knuckled hands hovered
closely about its bowl.He said, "I hope this comes to something."Lucky
said, "It had better." He sat back, his eyes fixed thoughtfully on the
opposite wall. "Look, Uncle Hector, you referred to my 'instinct' a
while back. It isn't instinct; not any more. This run of piracy is
entirely different from that of a quarter century ago.""Their ships are
harder to catch or stop, if that's what you mean," said Conway."Yes, but
doesn't that make it all the stranger that their raids are confined to
the asteroid belt? It's only here in the asteroids that trade has been
disrupted.""They're being cautious. Twenty-five years ago, when their
ships ranged all the way to Venus, we were forced to mount an offensive
and crush them. Now they stick to the asteroids and the government
hesitates to take expensive measures.""So far, so good," said Lucky,
"but how do they support themselves? It's always been the assumption
that pirates didn't raid for pure joy of it alone, but to pick up ships,
food, water, and supplies. You would think that now more than ever that
was a necessity. Captain Anton boasted to me of hundreds of ships and
thousands of worlds. That may have been a lie to impress me, but he
certainly took time for the push-gun duel, drifting openly in space for
hours as though he had no fear whatever of government interference. And
Hansen said, moreover, that the pirates had appropriated the various
hermit worlds as stopping-off places. There are hundreds of hermit
worlds. If the pirates dealt with all of them, orTHE ASTEROID THAT
WASN'T 105even a good part of them, that also means a large
organization."Now where do they get the food to support a large
organization and at the same time mount fewer raids now than pirates did
twenty-five years ago? The pirate crewman, Martin Maniu, spoke to me of
wives and families. He was a vat-man, he said. Presumably he cultured
yeast. Hansen had yeast foods on his asteroid and they weren't Venus
yeast. I know 0 the taste of Venus yeast."Put it all together. They grow
their own food in small yeast farms distributed among asteroid caverns.
They can get carbon dioxide directly from limestone rocks, and water and
extra oxygen from the Jovian satellites. Machinery and power units may
be imported from Sirius or obtained by an occasional raid. Raids will
also supply them with more recruits, both men and women."What it amounts
to is that Sirius is building an independent government against us. It's
making use of discontented people to build a widespread society that
will be difficult or impossible to crush if we wait too long. The
leaders, the Captain Antons, are after power in the first place and
they're perfectly willing to give half the Terrestrial Empire to Sirius
if they themselves can keep the other half."Conway shook his head.
"That's an awfully big structure for the small foundation of fact you
have. I doubt if we could convince the government. The Council of
Science can act by itself only so far, you know. We don't have a fleet
of our own, unfortunately.""I know. That's exactly why we need more
informa-106 LUCKY STARRtion. If, while it is still early in the game, we
can find their major bases, capture their leaders, expose their Sirian
connections----""Well?""Why, it's my opinion the movement would be done
with. I'm convinced that the average 'man of the asteroids,' to use
their own phrase, has no idea he's being made a Sirian puppet. He
probably has a grievance against Earth. He may think he's had a raw
deal, resent the fact that he couldn't find a job or advancement, that
he wasn't getting along as well as he should have. He may have been
attracted to what he thought would be a colorfyl life. All that, maybe.
Still, that's a long way from saying he'd be willing to side with
Earth's worst enemy. When he finds out that his leaders have been
tricking him into doing just that, the pirate menace will fall
apart."Lucky halted his intense whispering as the technician approached,
holding a flexible transparent tape with the computer's code prickings
upon it."Say," he said, "are you sure these figures you gave me were
right?"Lucky said, "I'm sure. Why?"The technician shook his head.
"There's something wrong. The final co-ordinates put your rock inside
one of the forbidden zones. That's allowing for proper motion, too. I
mean it can't be."Lucky's eyebrows lifted sharply. The man was certainly
right about the forbidden zones. No asteroids could possibly be found
within them. Those zones represented portions of the asteroid belt in
which asteroids, ifTHE ASTEROID THAT WASN'T 107they had existed, would
have had times of revolution about the Sun that were an even fraction of
Jupiter's twelve-year period of revolution. That would have meant that
the asteroid and Jupiter would have continually approached, every few
years, in the same portion of space. Jupiter's repeated pull would
slowly move the asteroid out of that zone. In the two billion years
since the planets had been formed Jupiter had cleared every asteroid out
of the forbidden zones and that was that."Are you sure," Lucky said,
"that your calculations are right?"The technician shrugged as though to
say, "I know my business.'_ But aloud he only said, "We can check it by
telescope. The thousand-incher is busy, but that's no good for close
work anyway. We'll get one of the smaller ones. Will you follow me,
please?"The Observatory proper was almost like a shrine, with the
various telescopes the altars. Men were absorbed in their work and did
not pause to look up when the technician and the three Councilmen
entered.The technician led the way to one of the wings into which the
huge, cavernous room was divided."Charlie," he said to a prematurely
balding young man, "can you swing Bertha into action?""What for?"
Charlie looked up from a series of photographic prints, star-speckled,
over which he had been bending."I want to check the spot represented by
these coordinates." He held out the computer film.Charlie glanced at it
and frowned. "What for? That's forbidden-zone territory."108 LUCKY
STARR"Would you focus the point anyway?" asked the technician. "It's
Council of Science business.""Oh? Yes, sir." 0 He was suddenly far more
pleasant. "It won't take long."He closed a switch and a flexible
diaphragm sucked inward high above, closing about the shaft of "Bertha,"
a hundred-twenty-inch telescope used for close work. The diaphragm made
an air-tight seal, and above it Lucky could make out the smooth whir of
the surface-lock opening. Bertha's large eye lifted upward, the
diaphragm clinging, and was exposed to the heavens."Mostly," explained
Charlie, "we use Bertha for photographic work. Ceres' rotation is too
rapid for convenient optical observations. The point you're interested
in is over the horizon, which is lucky."He took his seat near the
eyepiece, riding the telescope's shaft as though it were the stiff trunk
of a giant elephant. The telescope angled and the young astronomer
lifted high. Carefully he adjusted the focus.He lifted out of his perch
then and stepped down the rungs of a wall ladder. At the touch of his
finger a partition directly below the telescope moved aside to show a
black-lined pit. Into it a series of mirrors and lenses could focus and
magnify the telescopic image.There was only blackness.Charlie said,
"That's it." He used a meter stick as a point. "That little speck is
Metis, which is a pretty big rock. It's twenty-five miles across, but
it's millions of miles away. Here you have a few specks within a million
miles of the point you're interested in, but they're to one side,
outside the forbidden zone. We've got the starsTHE ASTEROID THAT WASN'T
109blanked out by phase polarization or they'd confuse
everything.""Thank you," said Lucky. He sounded stunned."Any time. Glad
to help whenever I can."432 * _432 They were in the elevator, headed
downward, before Lucky spoke again. He said distantly, "It can't
be.""Why not?" said Henree. "Your figures were wrong.""How could they
be? I got to Ceres.""You may have intended one figure and put d wn
another by mistake, then made a correction by eye and forgot to correct
the paper."Lucky shook his head. "I couldn't have done that. 1just
don't----Wait. Great Galaxy!" 0 He stared at themwildly."What's the
matter, Lucky?""It works out! Space, it fits in! Look, I was wrong. It's
not early in the game at all; it's darned late in the game. It may be
too late. I've underestimated them again."The elevator had reached the
proper level. The door opened and Lucky was out with a rapid
stride.Conway ran after, seized his elbow, swung him about. "What are
you talking about?""I'm going out there. Don't even think of stopping
me. And if I don't come back, for Earth's sake, force 0 the government
to begin major preparations. Otherwise the pirates may be in control of
the entire System within a year. Perhaps sooner.""Why?" demanded Conway
violently. "Because you couldn't find an asteroid?""Exactly," said
Lucky. CHAPTER 10THE ASTEROID THAT WASBigman had brought Conway and
Henree to Ceres on Lucky's own ship, the Shooting Starr, 0 and for that
Lucky was grateful. It meant he could go out into space with it, feel
its deck beneath his feet, hold its controls in his hands.The Shooting
Starr 0 was a two-man cruiser, built this last year after Lucky's
exploits among the farm boys of Mars. Its appearance was as deceptive as
modern science could make it. It had almost the appearance of a
space-yacht in its graceful lines, and its extreme length was not more
than twice that of Hansen's little rowboat. No traveler in space,
meeting the Shooting Starr, 0 would have estimated it to be anything
more than a rich man's plaything, speedy perhaps but thin-skinned and
unequal to hard knocks. Certainly it would not have seemed the type of
vessel to trust in the dangerous reaches of the asteroid belt.An
investigation of the interior of the vessel might have changed some of
those notions, however. The gleaming hyperatomic motors were the equal
of those on armored space-cruisers ten times the Shooting Starr's 0
weight. Its energy reserve was tremendous and the capacity of its
hysteretic shield was sufficient to stop the largest projectile that
could be put out against it by any-112 LUCKY STARRthing short of a
dreadnought. Offensively its limited mass prevented it from being
first-class, but weight for weight it could outfight any ship.432 _ _432
It was no wonder that Bigman capered with delight once he had entered
the air-lock and thrown off his space-suit."Space," Bigman said, "I'm
glad to get off that other tub. What do we do with it?""I'll have them
send up a ship from Ceres to scoop it . 'bb 0 in.Ceres was behind them,
a hundred thousand miles away. In appearance it was about half the
diameter of the Moon as seen from Earth.Bigman said curiously, "How
about letting me in on all this, Lucky? Why the sudden change of plans?
I was heading out all by myself, the last I heard.""There aren't any
co-ordinates for you to head to," said Lucky. Grimly he told him the
events of the last several hours.Bigman whistled. "Then where are we
going?""I'm not sure," said Lucky, "but we begin by aiming at the place
where the hermit's rock ought to be now."He studied the dials, and
added, "And we leave here fast, too."He meant 0 fast. Acceleration on
the Shooting Starr 0 went high as velocity built up. Bigman and Lucky
were pinned back to their diamagnetically cushioned chairs and the
growing pressure spread evenly over their entire body surfaces. The
oxygen concentration in the cabin was built up by the
acceleration-sensitive air-purifierTHE ASTEROID THAT WAS 113controls and
allowed shallower breathing without oxygen starvation. The g-harness (g
being the usual scientific symbol for acceleration) they both wore was
light and did not hamper their movements, but under the stress of
increasing velocity it stiffened and protected the bones, particularly
the spine, from breaking. A nylotex-mesh girdle kept the abdominal
viscera from undue harm.In every respect the cabin accessories had been
designed by experts at the Council of Science to allow of twenty to
thirty per cent greater acceleration on the Shooting Starr 0 than on
even the most advanced vessels of the fleet.Even on this occasion the
acceleration, though high, was less than half of that of which the ship
was capable.When velocity leveled off, the Shooting Starr 0 was five
million miles from Ceres, and, if Lucky or Bigman had been interested in
looking for it, they would have found it to have become, in appearance,
merely a speck of light, dimmer than many of the stars.Bigman said,
"Say, Lucky, I've been wanting to ask you. Do you have your glimmer
shield?"Lucky nodded and Bigman looked grieved."Well, you big dumb ox,"
the little fellow said, "why in space didn't you take it with you when
you went out pirate-hunting then?""I did have it with me," said Lucky
calmly. "I've had it with me since the day the Martians gave it to
me."As Lucky and Bigman (but no one else in the Galaxy) knew, the
Martians to whom Lucky referred were not the farm boys and ranchers of
Mars. They were rather a114 LUCKY STARRrace of immaterial creatures who
were the direct descendants of the ancient intelligences that once
inhabited the surface of Mars in the ages before it had lost its oxygen
and water. Excavating huge caverns below Mars' surface by destroying
cubic miles of rock, converting the matter so destroyed into energy and
storing that energy for future use, they now lived in comfortable
isolation. Abandoning their material bodies and living as pure energy,
their existence remained unsuspected by Mankind. Only Lucky Starr had
penetrated their fastnesses and as the one souvenir of that eerie trip_
he had obtained what Bigman called the "glimmer shield."Bigman's
annoyance increased. "Well, if you had it, why didn't you use it? What's
wrong with you?""You have the wrong idea of the shield, Bigman. It won't
do everything. It won't feed me and wipe my lips when I'm through.""I've
seen what it can do. It can do plenty.""It can, in certain ways. It can
soak up all types of energy.""Like the energy of a blaster bolt. You're
not going to kick about that, are you?""No, I admit I'd be immune to
blasters. The shield would soak up potential energy, too, if the mass of
a body weren't too great or too small. For instance, a knife or an
ordinary bullet couldn't penetrate, though the bullet might knock me
down. A good sledge hammer would swing right through the shield, though,
and even if it didn't its momentum would crush me. And what's more,See
David Starr, Space Ranger, 0 Doubleday & 0 Co., Inc., 1952.THE ASTEROID
THAT WAS 115molecules of air can go through the shield as if it weren't
there because they're too small to be handled. I'm telling you this so
that you'll understand that if I were wearing the shield and Dingo had
broken my face-plate when we were both tangled up in space, I would have
died anyway. The shield wouldn't have prevented the air in my suit from
scattering away in a split second.""If you had used it in the first
place, Lucky, you wouldn't have had any trouble. Don't I remember when
you used it on Mars?" Bigman chuckled at the reminiscence. "It glimmered
all over you, smoky-like, only luminous, so you could just be seen in a
haze. All except your face anyway. That was just a sheet of white
light.""Yes," said Lucky dryly, "I would have scared them. They would
have hit at me with blasters and I wouldn't have been hurt. So they
would have all high-tailed it off the Atlas, 0 gone off about ten miles,
and blasted the ship. I would have been stone dead. Don't forget that
the shield is only a shield. It doesn't give me any offensive powers
whatever.""Aren't you ever going to use it again?" asked Bigman."When
it's necessary. Not till then. If I use it too much, the effect would be
lost. Its weaknesses would be found out and I would be just a target for
anyone I came up against."Lucky studied the instruments. Calmly he said,
"Ready for acceleration again."Bigman said, "Hey----"Then, as he was
pushed back into his seat, he found himself fighting for breath and
could say nothing more.116 LUCKY STARRThe redness was rising to his eyes
and he could feel the skin drawing backward as though it were trying to
peel off his bones.This time the Shooting Starrs 0 acceleration was on
full.It lasted fifteen minutes. Toward the end Bigman was scarcely
conscious. Then it relaxed and life crept back.Lucky was shaking his
head and panting for breath.Bigman said, "Hey, that wasn't funny.""I
know," said Lucky."What's the idea? Weren't we going fast enough?""Not
quite. But it's all right now. We've shaken them.""Shaken whom?""Whoever
was following us. We were being followed, Bigman, from the minute you
stepped foot on the deck of the old Shooter. Look at the
Ergometer."Bigman did so. The Ergometer resembled the one on the Atlas 0
in name only. The one on the Atlas 0 had been a primitive model designed
to pick up motor radiation for the purpose of releasing the lifeboats.
That had been its only purpose. The Ergometer on the Shooting Starr 0
could pick up the radiation pattern of a hyperatomic motor on ships no
larger than an ordinary lifeboat and do it at a distance of better than
two million miles.Even now the inked line on the graphed paper jiggled
very faintly, but periodically."That isn't anything," said Bigman."It
was, a while ago. Look for yourself." Lucky unreeled the cylinder of
paper that had already passed the needle. The jigglings grew deeper,
more characteristic. "See that, Bigman?""It could be any ship. It could
be a Ceres freighter."THE ASTEROID THAT WAS 117"No. For one thing, it
tried to follow us and did a good job of it, too, which means it had a
pretty good Ergom-eter of its own. Besides that, did you ever see an
energy pattern like this?""Not exactly like this, Lucky.""I did, you
see, in the case of the ship that boarded the Atlas. 0 This Ergometer
does a much better job of pattern analysis, but the resemblance is
definite. The motor of the ship that's following us is of Sirian
design.""You mean it's Anton's ship.""That or a similar one. It doesn't
matter. We've lost them."432 * _432 "At the moment," said Lucky, "we're
right where the hermit's rock should be, plus or minus, say, a hundred
thousand miles.""Nothing's here," said Bigman."That's right. The
gravities register no asteroidal mass anywhere near us. We're in what
the astronomers call a forbidden zone.""Uh-huh," said Bigman wisely, "I
see."Lucky smiled. There was nothing to see. A forbidden zone in the
asteroid belt looked no different from a portion of the belt that was
thickly strewn with rocks, at least not to the naked eye. Unless an
asteroid happened to be within a hundred miles or so, the view was the
same. Stars or things that looked like stars filled the heavens. If some
of them were asteroids and not stars, there was no way of telling the
difference short of watching intently for several hours to see which
"stars" changed relative position, or using a telescope to begin
with.118 LUCKY STARRBigman said, "Well, what do we do?""Look around the
neighborhood. It may take us a few days."The path of the Shooting Starr
0 grew erratic. It headed outward from the Sun, away from the forbidden
zone and into the nearest constellation of asteroids. The gravities
jumped their needles at the pull of distant mass.Tiny world after tiny
world slid into the field of the visiplate, was allowed to remain there
while it rotated, and was then permitted to slip out. The Shooting
Starr's 0 velocity had decelerated to a relative crawl, but the miles
still passed by the hundreds of thousands and into the millions. The
hours passed. A dozen asteroids came and went."You better eat," said
Bigman.But Lucky contented himself with sandwiches and catnaps while he
and Bigman watched visiplate, gravities and Ergometer in turn.Then, with
an asteroid in view, Lucky said in a strained voice, "I'm going
down."Bigman was caught by surprise. "Is that the asteroid?" He looked
at its angularity. "Do you recognize it?""I think I do, Bigman. In any
case, it's going to be investigated."It took half an hour to manipulate
the ship into the asteroid's shadow."Keep it here," .Lucky said.
"Someone's got to stay with the ship and you're the one. Don't forget
it. It can be detected, but if it's in the shadow, with the lights out
and the motors at minimum, it will make it as hard as possibleTHE
ASTEROID THAT WAS 119for them. According to the Ergometer, there's no
ship in space near us now. Right?""Right!""The most important thing to
remember is this: Don't come down after me for any reason. When I'm
through, I'll come up to you. If I'm not back in twelve hours and
haven't called, either, back you go to Ceres with a report, after taking
photographs of this asteroid at every angle."Bigman's face grew sullenly
stubborn. "No.""This is the report," said Lucky calmly. He withdrew a
personal capsule from an inner pocket. "This capsule is keyed to Dr.
Conway. He's the only one who can open it. He's got to get the
information, regardless of me. Do you understand?""What's in it?" asked
Bigman, making no move to take it."Just theories, I'm afraid. I've told
no one of them, because I've come out here to try to get facts to back
them up. If I can't make it, the theories, at least, must get through.
Conway may believe them and he may get the government to act upon
them.""I won't do it," said Bigman. "I won't leave you.""Bigman, if I
can't trust you to do what's right regardless of yourself and myself,
you won't be much use to me after this if I come through safely."Bigman
held out his hand. The personal capsule was dropped into it."All right,"
he said.432 _ _432 Lucky dropped through vacuum to the asteroid's
surface, hastening the drop by use of the suit's push-gun.120 LUCKY
STARRHe knew the asteroid to be about the right size. It was roughly the
shape he remembered it to be. It was jagged enough and the sunlit
portion looked the right color. All that, however, might have held true
for any asteroid.But there was the other item. That was not likely to be
duplicated very often.From his waist pouch he took out a small
instrument that looked like a compass. Actually it was a pocket radar
unit. Its enclosed emission source could put out radio short waves of
almost any range. Certain octaves could be partially reflected by rock
and partially transmitted through reasonable distances.In the presence
of a thick layer of rock the reflection of radiation activated a needle
on the dial. In the presence of a thin layer of rock, as, for instance,
on a surface under which lay a cave or hollow, some radiation was
reflected, but some penetrated into the hollow and was reflected from
the further wall. In this way a double reflection occurred, one
component of which was much weaker than the second. In response to such
a double reflection the needle responded with a characteristic double
quiver.Lucky watched the instrument as he leaped easily over the stony
peaks. The needle's smooth pulsing gained a quiver, and then a distinct
subsidiary movement. Lucky's heart bounded. The asteroid was hollow.
Find where the subsidiary movements were strongest and there the hollow
would be nearest the surface. There would be the air-lock.For a few
moments all of Lucky's faculties were concentrated on the needle. He was
unaware of the mag-THE ASTEROID THAT WAS 121netic cable snaking its way
toward him from the near horizon.He was unaware of it until it snapped
about him in coil after coil, clinging close, its momentum tossing his
nearly weightless body first clear of the asteroid and then down to the
rock, where he lay helpless. CHAPTER 11AT CLOSE QUARTERSThree lights
came over the horizon and toward the prostrate Lucky. In the darkness of
the asteroid's night he could not see the figures that accompanied the
lights.Then there was a voice in his ear and the voice was the
well-known hoarseness of the pirate, Dingo. It said, "Don't call your
pal upstairs. I've got a jigger here that can pick up your carrier wave.
If you try to, I'll blast you out of your suit right now, nark!"He spat
out the final word; the contemptuous term of all lawbreakers for those
they considered to be spies of the law-enforcement agencies.Lucky kept
silent. From the moment he had first felt the tremor of his suit under
the lash of the magnetic cable he knew that he had fallen into a trap.
To call Bigman before he knew more about the nature of the trap would
have been putting the Shooting Starr 0 into danger, and that without
helping himself.Dingo stood over him, a foot on either side. In the
light of one of the flashes Lucky caught a quick glimpse of Dingo's
face-plate and of the stubby goggles that covered his eyes. Lucky knew
those to be infrared translators, capable of converting ordinary heat
radiation into visible light. Even without flashes and in the
asteroid'sdark night they had been able to watch him by the energy of
his own heaters.Dingo said, "What's the matter, nark? Scared?" He lifted
a bulky leg with its bulkier metal swathing and brought his heel down
sharply in the direction of Lucky's face-plate. Lucky turned his head
swiftly away to let the blow fall on the sturdier metal of the helmet,
but Dingo's heel stopped midway. He laughed whoop-ingly."You won't get
it that easy, nark," he said.His voice changed as he spoke to the other
two pirates. "Hop over the jag and get the air-lock open."For a moment
they hesitated. One of them said, "But, Dingo_, the captain said you
were too----"Dingo said, "Get going, or maybe I'll start with him and
finish with you."In the face of the threat the two hopped away. Dingo
said to Lucky, "Now suppose we get you to the air-lock."He was still
holding the butt end of the magnetic cable. With a flick at the switch
he turned off its current and momentarily demagnetized it. He stepped
away and pulled it sharply toward himself. Lucky dragged along the rocky
floor of the asteroid, bounced upward, and rolled partly out of the
cable. Dingo touched the switch again and the remaining coils suddenly
clung and held.Dingo flicked the whip upward. Lucky traveled with it,
while Dingo maneuvered skillfully to maintain his own balance. Lucky
hovered in space and Dingo walked with him as though he were a child's
balloon at the end of a string.AT CLOSE QUARTERS 125The lights of the
other two were visible again after five minutes. They were shining into
a patch of darkness of which regular boundaries were proof enough that
it was an open air-lock.Dingo called, "Watch out! I've got a package to
deliver."He demagnetized the cable again, and flicked it downward,
rising six inches into the air as he did so. Lucky rotated rapidly,
spinning completely out of the cable.Dingo leaped upward and caught him.
With the skill of a man long used to weightlessness, he avoided Lucky's
attempts to break his hold, and hurled him in the direction of the
air-lock. He broke his own backward tumble by a quick double spurt of
his suit's push-gun and righted himself in time to see Lucky enter the
air-lock cleanly.What followed was clearly visible in the light of the
pirates' flashes. Caught in the pseudo-grav field that existed within
the air-lock, Lucky was hurled suddenly downward, hitting the rocky
floor with a clatter and force that knocked the breath out of him.
Dingo's braying laughter filled his helmet.The outer door closed, the
inner opened. Lucky got to his feet, actually thankful for the normality
of gravity."Get in, nark." Dingo was holding a blaster.Lucky paused as
he entered the asteroid's interior. His eyes shifted quickly from side
to side while the frost gathered at the rims of his face-plate. What he
saw was not the soft-lit library of the hermit, Hansen, but a
tremendously long hallway, the roof of which was supported by a series
of pillars. He could not see to the other end. Openings to rooms pierced
the wall of the corridors126 LUCKY STARRregularly. Men hurried to and
fro and there was the smell of ozone and machine oil in the air. In the
distance he could hear the characteristic drum-drum of what must have
been gigantic hyperatomic motors.It was quite obvious that this was no
hermit's cell, but a large industrial plant, inside an asteroid.0Lucky
bit his lower lip thoughtfully and wondered despondently if all this
information would die with him now.Dingo said, "In there, nark. Get in
there."It was a storeroom he indicated, its shelves and bins well
filled, but empty of human beings other than themselves."Say, Dingo,"
said one of the pirates nervously, "why are we showing him all this? I
don't think-""Then don't talk," said Dingo, and laughed. "Don't worry,
he won't tell anyone about anything he sees. I guarantee that. Meanwhile
I have a little something to finish with him. Get that suit off him."He
was removing his own suit as he spoke. He stepped out, monstrously
bulky. One hand rubbed slowly over the hairy back of the other. He was
savoring the moment.Lucky said firmly, "Captain Anton never gave you
orders to kill me. You're trying to finish a private feud and it will
only get you into trouble. I'm a valuable man to the captain and he
knows it."Dingo sat down on the edge of a bin of small metal objects,
with a grin on his face. "To listen to you, nark, you'd think you had a
case. But you didn't fool us, not for one minute. When we left you on
the rock with the hermit, what do you think we did? We watched. 0 Cap-AT
CLOSE QUARTERS 127tain Anton's no fool. He sent me back. He said, 'Watch
that rock and report back.' I saw the hermit's dinghy leave. I could
have blasted you out of space then, but the order was to follow."I
stayed off Ceres for a day and a half and spotted the hermit's dinghy
hitting out for space again. I waited some more. Then I caught this
other ship coming out to meet it. The man off the dinghy got on to the
other ship and I followed you when you took off."Lucky could not help
smiling. "Tried to follow, you mean."Dingo's face turned a blotchy red.
He spat out, "All right. You were faster. Your kind is good at running.
What of it? I didn't have to chase you. I just came here and waited. I
knew where you were heading. I've got you, haven't I?"Lucky said, "All
right, but what have you got? I was unarmed on the hermit's rock. I
didn't have any weapons, while the hermit had a blaster. I had to do
what he said. He wanted to get back to Ceres and he forced me along so
he could claim he was being kidnapped if the men of the asteroids
stopped him. You admit yourself that I got off Ceres as fast as I could
and tried to get back here.""In a nice, shiny government ship?""I stole
it. So? It just means that you've got another ship for your fleet. And a
good one."Dingo looked at the other pirates. "Doesn't he throw the
comet-dust, though?"Lucky said, "I warn you again. The captain will take
anything that happens to me out on you."128 LUCKY STARR"No he won't,"
snarled Dingo, "because he knows who you are and so do I, Mr. David
Lucky Starr. Come on, move out into the middle of the room."Dingo rose.
He said to his two companions, "Get those bins out of the way. Pull them
over to one side."They looked at his staring, blood-congested face once
and did as he said. Dingo's bulbously thickset body was slightly
stooped, his head sank down into his bulging shoulders, and his thick,
somewhat bandy, legs planted themselves firmly. The scar on his upper
lip was a vivid white.He said, "There are easy ways of finishing you and
there are nice ways. I don't like a nark and I especially don't like a
nark who fouls me in a push-gun fight. So before I finish you, I'm
breaking you into little pieces."Lucky, looking tall and spindly in
comparison with the other, said, "Are you man enough to take care of me
alone, Dingo, or will your two friends help you?""I don't need help,
pretty boy." He laughed nastily. "But if you try to run, they'll stop
you, and if you keep on trying to run, they've got neuronic whips that
will really 0 stop you." He raised his voice. "And use them, you two, if
you have to."Lucky waited for the other to make his move. He knew that
the one most nearly fatal tactic would be to try to mix it up at close
quarters. Let the pirate enclose his chest in the hug of those enormous
arms and broken ribs would be the nearly certain result.Dingo, right
fist drawn back, ran forward. Lucky stood his ground as long as he
dared, then stepped quickly to his right, seized his opponent's extended
left arm, pulledAT CLOSE QUARTERS 129backward, taking advantage of the
other's forward momentum, and caught the other's ankle against his
foot.Dingo went sprawling forward and down heavily. He was up
immediately, however, one cheek scraped and little lights of madness
dancing in his eyes.He thundered toward Lucky, who retired nimbly toward
one of the bins lining the wall.Lucky seized the ends of the bin and
swung his legs up and out. Dingo caught them in his chest, halted
momentarily. Lucky whirled out of the way and was free in the center of
the room again.One of the pirates called out, "Hey, Dingo, let's stop
fooling around."Dingo panted, "I'll kill him. I'll kill him."But he was
more cautious now. His little eyes were nearly buried in the fat and
gristle that surrounded his eyeballs. He crept forward, watching Lucky,
waiting for the moment he might strike.Lucky said, "What's the matter,
Dingo? Afraid of me? You get afraid very quick for such a big talker."As
Lucky expected, Dingo roared incoherently and dashed heavily and
directly at him. Lucky had no trouble in evading the bull rush. The side
of his hand came sharply and swiftly down on the back of Dingo's
neck.Lucky had seen any number of men knocked unconscious by that
particular blow; he had seen more than one killed. But Dingo merely
staggered. He shook it off and turned, snarling.He walked flat-footedly
toward the dancing Lucky. Lucky lashed out with his fist, which landed
sharply on Dingo's scraped cheek bone. Blood flowed, but Dingo130 LUCKY
STARRdid not so much as attempt to block the blow, nor did he blink when
it landed.Lucky squirmed away and struck sharply twice more at the
pirate. Dingo paid no attention. He came forward, always
forward.Suddenly, unexpectedly, he went down, apparently as a man who
had stumbled. But his arms shot out as he fell and one hand closed about
Lucky's right ankle. Lucky went down too."I've got you now," whispered
Dingo.He reached up to catch Lucky's waist and in a moment, fast-locked,
they were rolling across the floor.Lucky felt the growing, enclosing
pressure and pain washed inward like an advancing flame. Dingo's fetid
panting was in his ear.Lucky's right arm was free, but his left was
enclosed in the numbing vise of the other's grip about his chest. With
the last of his fading strength, Lucky brought his right fist up. The
blow traveled no more than four inches, catching the point where Dingo's
chin met his neck with a force that sent stabs of pain the length of
Lucky's arm.Dingo's grip loosened for a moment and Lucky, writhing,
flung himself out of the deadly embrace and onto his feet.Dingo got up
more slowly. His eyes were glassy, and fresh blood was trickling out the
corner of his mouth.He muttered thickly, "The whip! The
whip!"Unexpectedly he turned upon one of the pirates who had been
standing there a frozen onlooker. He wrested the weapon from the other's
hand and send him sprawling.Lucky tried to duck, but the neurom'c whip
was upAT CLOSE QUARTERS 131and flashing. It caught his right side and
stimulated the nerves of the area it struck into a bath of pain. Lucky's
body stiffened and went down again.For a moment his senses recorded only
confusion, and with what consciousness he possessed he expected death to
be a second off. Dimly he heard a pirate's voice."Look, Dingo, the
captain said to make it look like an accident. He's a Council of Science
man and . . ."It was all Lucky heard.When he swam back to consciousness
with an excruciating tingle of pins and needles down the length of his
side, he found himself in a space-suit again. They were just afyout to
put on his helmet. Dingo, lips puffed, cheek and jaw bruised, watched
malignantly.There was a voice in the doorway. A man was entering
hurriedly, full of talk.Lucky heard him say, "-for Post 247. It's
getting so I can't keep track of all the requisitions. I can't even keep
our own orbit straight enough to keep up the co-ordinate corrections
of----"The voice flickered out. Lucky twisted his head and caught sight
of a small man with spectacles and gray hair. He was just inside the
doorway, looking with mingled astonishment and disbelief at the disorder
that met his eyes."Get out," roared Dingo."But I've got to have a
requisition----""Later!"The little man left and the helmet was fitted
over Lucky's head.They took him out again, through the air-lock, to a132
LUCKY STARRsurface which was now in the feeble blaze of the distant Sun.
A catapult waited on a relatively flat table of rock. Its function was
no mystery to Lucky. An automatic winch was drawing back a large metal
lever which bent more and more slowly till its original slant had
strained back into a complete horizontal at the tip. Light straps were
attached to the bent lever and then buckled about Lucky's waist."Lie
still," said Dingo. His voice was dim and scratchy in Lucky's ear. There
was something wrong with the helmet receiver, Lucky realized. "You're
just wasting your oxygen. Just to make you feel better, we're sending
ships up to blast your friend down before he can pick up speed, if he
feels like running."An instant after that Lucky felt the sharp tingling
vibration of the lever as it was released. It sprang elas-tically back
into its original position with terrific force. The buckles about him
parted smoothly and he was cast off at a speed of a mile a minute or
better, with no gravitational field to slow him. There was one glimpse
of the asteroid with the pirates looking up at him. The whole was
shrinking rapidly even as he watched.He inspected his suit. He already
knew that his helmet radio had been maltreated. Sure enough, the
sensitivity knob hung loose. It meant his voice could penetrate no more
than a few miles of space. They had left him his space-suit's push-gun.
He tried it but nothing happened. Its gas stores had been drained.He was
quite helpless. There were only the contents of one oxygen cylinder
between himself and a slow, unpleasant death.CHAPTER 12SHIP VERSUS
SHIPWith a clammy constriction of his chest Lucky surveyed the
situation. He thought he could guess the pirates' plans. On the one
hand, they wished to get rid of him, since he obviously knew far too
much. On the other hand, they must want him to be found dead in such a
way that the Council of Science would be unable to prove conclusively
that his death was by pirate violence.Once before, pirates had made the
mistake of killing an agent of the Council and the resultant fury had
been crushing. They would be more cautious this time.He thought, They'll
rush the Shooting Starr, 0 blanket it with interference to keep Bigman
from sending out a call for help. Then they can use a cannon blast on
its hull. It would make a good imitation of a meteorite collision. They
can make that look better by sending their own engineers on board to
hocus the shield activators. It would look as though a defect in the
mechanism had prevented the shield from going up as the meteorite
approached.They would know his own course through space, Lucky knew.
There would be nothing to deflect him from whatever his original angles
of flight had been. Later, with him safely dead, they would pick him up
and send him whirling in an orbit about the broken Shooting0134 LUCKY
STARRStarr. 0 The discoverers (and perhaps one of their own ships would
send in an anonymous report of the find) would reach an obvious
conclusion. Bigman at the controls, maneuvering to the last, killed at
his post. Lucky, on the other hand, scrambling into a suit, damaging the
external sensitivity knob of the suit's radio in the excitement. He
would have been unable to call for help. He would have expended his
push-gun's gas in a desperate and futile attempt to find a place of
safety. And he would have died.It would not work. Neither Conway nor
Henree could possibly believe that Lucky would be concerned only with
his own safety while Bigman stuck loyally at the controls. But then, the
failure of the scheme, would be small satisfaction to a dead Lucky
Starr. Worse yet, it would not only be Lucky Starr who would die, but
all the information now locked in Lucky Starr's head.For a moment he was
sick with outrage at himself that he had not forced all his suspicions
on Conway and Henree before leaving, that he had waited till he boarded
the Shooting Starr 0 before preparing the personal capsule. Then he
gained control of himself. No one would have believed him without
facts.For that very reason he would have to get back.Have to!But how?
What good was "have to" when one was alone and helpless in space with a
few hours' worth of oxygen and nothing else?Oxygen!Lucky thought,
there's my oxygen. Anyone but Dingo would have drained his cylinder of
all but dregs, to letSHIP VERSUS SHIP 135death come quickly. But if
Lucky knew Dingo, the pirate had sent him on his way with a loaded
cylinder simply to prolong the agony.Good! Then he would reverse that.
He would use the oxygen otherwise. And if he failed, death would come
the sooner, despite Dingo.Only he must not fail.The asteroid had been
crossing his line of vision periodically as he spun in space. First, it
was a shrinking rock, its sunlit highlights slanting jaggedly across the
blackness of space. Then it had been a bright star and a single line of
light. The brightness was fading quickly now. Once the asteroid became
dim enough to be simply one more in the myriad of stars, it was all
over. Not many minutes were left before that would be the case.His
clumsy, metal-covered fingers were already fumbling with the flexible
tube that led from the air inlet just under the face-plate to the oxygen
cylinder in back. He twisted strenuously at the bolt that held the air
tube tightly fixed to the cylinder.It gave. He paused to fill his helmet
and suit with oxygen. Ordinarily oxygen leaked slowly in from the
cylinders at about the rate it was used up by human lungs. The carbon
dioxide and water formed as the result of respiration were mostly
absorbed by the chemicals contained in the valved canisters affixed to
the inner surface of the suit's chest plates. The result was that oxygen
was kept at a pressure one fifth that of Earth's atmosphere. This was
exactly right, since four fifths of Earth's atmosphere is nitrogen
anyway, which is useless for breathing.136 LUCKY STARRHowever, this left
room for higher concentrations, up to somewhat more than normal
atmospheric pressure, before there was danger of toxic effects. Lucky
let the oxygen pour into his suit.Then, having done so, he closed the
valve under his face-plate entirely and removed the cylinder.The
cylinder was itself a sort of push-gun. It was an unusual push-gun, to
be sure. For a person marooned in space to use the precious oxygen that
stood between himself and death as motive power, to blow it into space,
meant desperation. Or else, a firm resolution.Lucky cracked the reducing
valve and let a blast of oxygen issue out. There was no line of crystals
this time. Oxygen, unlike carbon dioxide, froze at very low temperatures
indeed and before it could lose sufficient heat to freeze, it had
diffused out into space. Gas or solid, however, Newton's third law of
motion still held. As the gas pushed out one way, Lucky was pushed in
the opposite direction by a natural counterpush.His spinning slowed.
Carefully he allowed the asteroid to come into full view before stopping
the spin completely.He was still receding from the rock. It was no
longer particularly brighter than the neighboring stars. Conceivably he
had already mistaken his target, but he closed his mind against that
uncertainty.He fixed his eyes firmly on the spot of light he assumed to
be the asteroid and let the cylinder blast in the opposite direction. He
wondered if he would have enough to reverse the direction of his travel.
There was no way of telling at the moment.SHIP VERSUS SHIP 137In any
case, he would have to save some gas. He would need it to maneuver about
the asteroid, get on its night side, find Bigman and the ship, unless .
. .Unless the ship had already been driven away, or destroyed, by the
pirates.It seemed to Lucky that the vibration of his hands, due to the
escaping oxygen, was lessening. Either the cylinder was running low, or
its temperature was dropping. He was holding it away from his suit so it
was no longer absorbing heat from it. It was from the suit that oxygen
cylinders gained enough heat to be breathable, and the carbon dioxide
cylinders of the push-guns gained enough heat to keep their contents
gaseous. In the vacuum of space heat could be lost only by radiation, a
slow process, but, even so, the oxygen cylinder had had time to drop in
temperature.He encircled the cylinder in his arms, hugged it to his
chest, and waited.It seemed hours, but only fifteen minutes passed
before it seemed to him that the asteroid was growing brighter. Was he
approaching the rock again? Or was it imagination? Another fifteen
minutes passed and it was distinctly brighter. Lucky felt a deep
gratitude to the chance that had shot him out on the sunlit side of the
rock so that he could see it plainly as a target.It was getting harder
to breathe. There was no question of carbon dioxide asphyxiation. That
gas was removed as it was formed. Still, each breath also removed a
small fraction of his precious oxygen. He tried to breathe shallowly,
close his eyes, rest. After all, he could do nothing more until he had
reached and passed the138 LUCKY STARRasteroid. There on the night side,
Bigman might still be waiting.Then, if he could get close enough to
Bigman, if he could call him on his limping radio before he passed out,
there might yet be a chance.432 * _432 The hours had passed slowly and
torturously for Bigman. He longed to descend, but dared not. He reasoned
with himself that, if the enemy existed, he would have shown himself by
now. Then he argued it out bitterly and came to the conclusion that the
very silence and motionlessness of space meant a trap, and that Lucky
was caught.He put Lucky's personal capsule before him and wondered about
its contents. If only there were some way of bursting it, of reading the
thin roll of microfilm within. If he could do that, he could radio it to
Ceres, get it off his hands, and be free to go slamming down to the
rock. He would blast them all, drag Lucky out of whatever mess he was
in.No! In the first place he dared not use the sub-etherics. True, the
pirates could not break the code, but they would detect the carrier wave
and he had been instructed not to give away the location of the
ship.Besides, what was the use of thinking of breaking into a personal
capsule. A solar furnace could melt and destroy it, an atom blast could
disintegrate it, but nothing could open it and leave its message intact
except the living touch of the person for which it had been
"personalized." That was that.More than half of the twelve-hour period
had passedSHIP VERSUS SHIP 139when the gravities gave their entirely
distinctive warning.Bigman roused himself out of his frustrated reverie
and stared with shocked surprise at the Ergometer. The pulsations of
several ships were blending themselves into complicated curves that
melted snakelike from one configuration to another.The Shooting Starr's
0 shield, which had been glimmering routinely at a strength sufficient
to ward off casual "debris" (the usual space term for wandering
meteorites an inch or less in diameter) stiffened to maximum. Bigman
heard the soft purr of the power output grow strident. One by one, he
let the short-range visiplates glow into life, bank on bank of them.His
mind churned. The ships were rising from the asteroid, since none could
be detected further away. Lucky must be caught, then; dead, probably. He
didn't care now how many ships came at him. He would get them all, every
single one of them.He sobered. The first Sun glint had caught in one of
the visiplates. He maneuvered the cross hairs and centered them. He then
depressed something that looked like a piano key and, caught in an
invisible burst of energy, the pirate ship glowed.The glow was not due
to any action upon its hull, but was rather the result of the energy
absorption of the enemy screen. It glowed brightly and more brightly
still. Then it dimmed as the enemy turned tail and put distance between
them.A second ship and a third were in view. A projectile was making its
way toward the Shooting Starr. 0 In the140 LUCKY STARRvacuum of space
there was no flash, no sound, but the Sun caught it and it was a little
sparking spot of light. It became a little circle in the visiplate, then
a larger one, until finally it moved out of the plate's field.Bigman
might have dodged, flashed the Shooter out of the way, but he thought,
Let it hit. He wanted them to see what they were playing with. The
Shooter might look like a rich man's toy, but they weren't going to put
it out of action with a few slingshooters.The projectile struck and
slogged to a halt against the Shooting Starr's 0 hysteretic shields,
which, Bigman knew, must have flashed momentarily into brilliance. The
ship itself moved smoothly, absorbing the momentum that had leaked past
the shield."Let's return that," Bigman muttered. The Shooting Starr 0
carried no projectiles, explosive or otherwise, but its store of energy
projectors was varied and powerful.His hand was hovering over the
blaster controls when he saw in one of the visiplates something that
brought a scowl to his small, determined face, something that looked
like a man in a space-suit.It was strange that the space-ship was more
vulnerable to a man in a space-suit than to the best weapons of another
ship. An enemy ship could be easily detected by gravities at a distance
of miles and by Ergometers at a distance of thousands of miles. A single
man in a space-suit could only be detected by a gravitic at a hundred
yards and by an Ergometer not at all.Again, a hysteretic shield worked
the more effectively the greater the velocity of the projectile. Huge
lumps of metal tearing at miles per second could be stopped cold.SHIP
VERSUS SHIP 141One man, however, drifting along at ten miles an hour was
not even aware of the existence of the shield except for a tiny warming
of his suit.Let a dozen men creep toward a ship at once and only great
skill could bring them all down. If two or three penetrated and
succeeded in blasting open the air-lock with hand weapons, the ship they
attacked was seriously crippled.And now Bigman caught the little speck
that could only mean the advance guard of such a suicide squadron. He
brought one of the secondaries to bear. The single figure was centered
and Bigman was ready to fire when his radio receiver sounded.For a
moment he was startled. The pirates had attacked without warning and had
not tried to communicate, to call for surrender, to offer terms,
anything. What now?He hesitated and the sounding became a word, repeated
twice, "Bigman . . . Bigman . . . Bigman . . ."Bigman jumped from his
seat, ignoring the suited man, the battle, everything. "Lucky! Is that
you?""I'm near the ship . . . Space-suit . . . Air . . . nearly
gone.""Great Galaxy!" Bigman, white-faced, maneuvered the Shooting Starr
0 nearer the figure in space, the figure whom he had nearly
destroyed.432 _ _432 Bigman watched over Lucky, who, helmet off, was
still gulping air. "You'd better get some rest, Lucky.""Later," said
Lucky. He climbed out of his suit. "Have they attacked yet?"142 LUCKY
STARRBigman nodded. "It doesn't matter. They're just breaking their
teeth on the old Shooter.""They've got stronger teeth than any they've
shown," said Lucky. "We've got to get away and fast. They'll be bringing
out their heavy craft, and even our 0 energy stores won't last
forever.""Where are they going to get heavy craft from?""That's a major
pirate base down there! The 0 major base, perhaps.""You mean it isn't 0
the hermit's rock?""I mean we've got to get away."He took the controls,
face still pale from his ordeal. For the first time the rock below them
moved from its position on the screens. Even during the attack Bigman
had heeded Lucky's parting order to stay put for twelve hours.The rock
grew larger.Bigman protested. "If we've got to get away, why are we
landing?""We're not landing." Lucky watched the screen intently, while
one hand set the controls of the ship's heavy blaster. Deliberately he
widened and softened the focus of the blaster till it could cover a
broad area indeed, but at an energy intensity reduced to little more
than that of an ordinary heat ray.He waited, for reasons that the
wondering Bigman could not divine, and then fired. There was a startling
blazing brightness on the asteroid's surface which subsided almost
instantly into a glowing redness that in a further minute or so
blackened out.SHIP VERSUS SHIP 143"Now let's go," said Lucky, and, as
new ships spiraled up from the pirate base, acceleration took hold.Half
an hour later, with asteroid gone and any pursuing ships safely lost, he
said, "Get Ceres. I want to speak to Conway.""Okay, Lucky. And listen,
I've got the co-ordinates of that asteroid. Shall I send them along? We
can send a fleet back and-""It won't do any good," said Lucky, "and it
isn't necessary."Bigman's eyes widened. "You don't mean you destroyed
the rock with that blaster bolt?""Of course not. I hardly touched it,"
said Lucky. "Have you got Ceres?""I'm having trouble," said Bigman
pettishly. He knew Lucky was in one of his tight-mouthed moods and
wouldgive no information. "Wait, here it is, but,
hey----They'rebroadcasting a general alarm!"There was no need to explain
that. The call was strident and uncoded. "General call to all fleet
units outside Mars. Ceres under attack by enemy force, presumed pirates.
. . . General call to all fleet units . . ."Bigman said, "Great
Galaxy!"Lucky said tightly, "They stay one step ahead of us, no matter
what we do. We've got to get back! Quickly!" CHAPTER 13RAID!The ships
came swarming out of space in perfect coordination. An entire wing
struck directly at the Observatory. In response to this, almost
inevitably, the defending forces on Ceres concentrated their power at
that point.The attack was not pressed full-force. Ship after ship dived
downward to launch energy beams at an obviously impregnable shield. None
took the risky step of trying to blast the underground power plants, the
location of which they must have known. Government ships took to space
and ground batteries opened up. In the end two pirate ships were
destroyed when their shields broke down and they flared into glowing
vapor. Another one, its energy reserves down to a trickle, was almost
captured in the eventual pursuit. It was blown up at the last moment,
probably by its own crew.Even during the attack some of the defenders
suspected it to be a feint. Later, of course, they knew that for a fact.
While the Observatory was engaged, three ships landed on the asteroid a
hundred miles away. Pirates disembarked and with hand weapons and
portable blasting cannon attacked the residential air-locks from
flitting "space-sleds."The locks were blasted open and space-suited
pirates146 LUCKY STARRswarmed down the corridors from which air emptied.
The upper reaches of the corridors were factories and offices, the
occupants of which had evacuated at the first alarm. Their place was
taken by space-suited members of the local militia who fought bravely,
but were no match for the professionals of the pirate fleet.In the lower
depths, in the peaceful apartments of Ceres, the noise of blasting
battle sounded. Calls for help were sent out. Then, almost as suddenly
as they came, the pirates retreated.When they left, the men of Ceres
counted their casualties. Fifteen Cereans were dead and many more hurt
in one way or another, as against the bodies of five pirates. Damage to
property was very high."And one man," Conway explained furiously to
Lucky when the latter arrived, "is missing. Only he's not on the list of
inhabitants and we've been able to keep his name out of the news
reports."432 _ _432 Lucky found Ceres the focus of almost hysterical
excitement now that the raid was over. It had been the first attack on
an important Terrestrial center by any enemy in a generation. He had had
to pass three inspections before being allowed to land.He sat in the
Council office with Conway and Henree and said bitterly, "So Hansen is
gone! That's what it boils down to.""I'll say this for the old hermit,"
said Henree. "He had guts. When the pirates penetrated, he insisted on
getting into a suit, grabbing up a blaster, and going up there with the
militia."RAID! 147"We weren't short on militia," said Lucky. "If he had
stayed down here, he would have done us a much greater service. How is
it you didn't stop him? Under the circumstances was he a person to be
allowed to do such a thing?" Lucky Starr's usually even voice contained
a repressed anger.Conway said patiently, "We weren't with him. The guard
we left in charge had to report for militia duty. Hansen insisted on
joining him and the guard decided he could do both duties at once that
way; fight the pirates and guard the hermit.""But he didn't guard the
hermit.""Under the circumstances he can scarcely be blamed. The guard
saw Hansen last charging a pirate. Next thing he knew there was no one
in sight and the pirates were retreating. Hansen's body hasn't been
recovered. The pirates must have him alive or dead.""So they must," said
Lucky. "Now let me tell you something. Let me tell you exactly what a
bad mistake this was. I'm certain that the whole attack on Ceres was
arranged simply to capture Hansen."Henree reached for his pipe. "You
know, Hector," he said to Conway, "I'm almost tempted to go along with
Lucky on that. The attack on the Observatory was a miserable one, an
obvious false alarm to draw off our defenses. Getting Hansen was the
only thing they did accomplish."Conway snorted. "One possible
information leak like the hermit isn't worth risking thirty
ships.""That's the whole point," said Lucky vehemently. "Right now, it
may be. I told you about the asteroid I148 LUCKY STARRwas on, the kind
of industrial plant it must have been. Suppose they're almost at the
point where they're ready to make the big push? Suppose Hansen knows the
exact date for when the push is scheduled? Suppose he knows the exact
method?""Then why hasn't he told us?" demanded Conway."Maybe," said
Henree, "he's waiting to use it as material with which to buy his own
immunity. We never did have a chance really to discuss that question
with him. You've got to admit, Hector, that if he had that kind of key
information, any number of ships would have been worth the risk. And
you've got to admit Lucky is probably right about their being ready for
the big push."Lucky looked sharply from one to the other. "Why do you
say that, Uncle Gus? What's happened?""Tell him, Hector," said
Henree."Why tell him anything," growled Conway. "I'm tired of his
one-man trips. He'll be wanting to go to Ganymede.""What's on Ganymede?"
asked Lucky coldly. As far as he knew, there was little or nothing on
Ganymede to interest anyone. It was Jupiter's largest moon, but the very
nearness of Jupiter made it difficult to maneuver space-ships, so that
space travel in its vicinity was unprofitable."Tell him," said
Henree."Look," said Conway. "Here it is. We knew Hansen was important.
The reason we didn't have him under tighter observation, the reason Gus
and I weren't there ourselves, was that two hours before the pirate
attack aRAID! 149report came in from the Council to the effect that
there was evidence that Sirian forces had landed on Ganymede.""What kind
of evidence?""Tight-beam sub-etheric signals had been penetrated. It's a
long story, but the nub of it was that, more by accident than by
anything else, a few scraps of code were picked up. The experts say it's
a Sirian code and certainly there isn't anything Terrestrial on Ganymede
that's capable of putting out signals in a beam tliat 0 tight. Gus and I
were going to take Hansen and return to Earth when the pirates attacked,
and that's it. Right now we've still got to return to Earth. With Sirius
on the scene there may be war at any time."Lucky said, "I see. Well,
before we go to Earth, there's one thing I would like to check on. Do we
have motion pictures of the pirate attack? I'm supposing the defenses of
Ceres weren't so disorganized that pictures weren't taken?""They've been
taken. How do you expect them to help?""I'll tell you after I've seen
them."432 _ _432 Men in the uniform of the fleet, and wearing high-rank
insignia, projected the top-secret motion pictures of what later became
known in history as the "Ceres Raid.""Twenty-seven ships attacked the
Observatory. Is that right?" asked Lucky,"Right," said a commander. "No
more than that.""Good. Now let's see if I have the rest of the facts
straight. Two of the ships were accounted for during the150 LUCKY
STARRfight and a third during the pursuit. The remaining twenty-four got
away, but you have one or more shots of each of them in retreat."The
commander smiled. "If you're implying that any of them landed on Ceres
and are still hidden here, you're quite wrong.""As far as those
twenty-seven ships are concerned, perhaps. But three more ships did 0
land on Ceres and their crew attacked the Massey Air-lock. Where are the
pictures of those?""Unfortunately we didn't get many of those," admitted
the commander uncomfortably. "It was a case of complete surprise. But we
have pictures of them in retreat, too, and we showed you those.""Yes,
you did, and there were only two ships in those pictures. Eyewitnesses
reported three as having landed."The commander said stiffly, "And three
took off and retreated. There's eyewitness evidence of that also.""But
you have pictures of only two?""Well . . . yes.""Thank you."432 _ _432
Back in the office Conway said, "Now what was that all about, Lucky?""I
thought Captain Anton's ship might be in an interesting place. The
motion pictures proved it was.""Where was it?""Nowhere. That was what
was interesting. His ship is the one pirate ship I would recognize, yet
no ship faintly similar took part in the raid. This is strange because
Anton must be one of their very best men or theyRAID! 151wouldn't have
sent him out after the Atlas. 0 Or it would be strange if the truth
wasn't that thirty ships attacked Ceres and we had pictures of only
twenty-nine. The missing thirtieth was Anton!""I could figure that out
too," said Conway. "What of it?"Lucky said, "The attack on the
Observatory was a feint. That's admitted even by the defending ships,
now. It was the three ships that attacked the air-lock that were
important and they were under Anton's command. Two of those ships joined
the rest of the squadron in their retreat, a feint within a feint. The
third ship, Anton's own, the only one we didn't see, continued on with
the main business of the day. It left on an entirely different
trajectory. People saw it lift into space but it veered off so radically
that our own ships, chasing the main body of enemy with all its might,
never even caught it on film."Conway said unhappily, "You're going to
say that it's going to Ganymede.""Doesn't it follow? The pirates,
however well organized, can't attack Earth and its dependencies on their
own. But they can 0 put up an excellent diversionary fight. They can
keep enough Terrestrial ships patrolling the endless asteroid belt to
allow Sirian fleets to defeat the remainder. On the other hand, Sirius
can't safely conduct a war eight light years away from their own planet
unless they can count on major help from the asteroids. After all, eight
light years amounts to forty-five trillion miles. Anton's ship is
speeding to Ganymede to assure them of that help and to give the word to
begin the war. Without warning, of course."152 LUCKY STARR"If only,"
muttered Conway, "we could have stumbled on their Ganymede base
sooner.""Even with the knowledge of Ganymede," said Henree, "we would
not have known the seriousness of the situation without Lucky's two
trips into asteroid territory.""I know. My apologies, Lucky. Meanwhile
we have very little time to do anything. We'll have to strike at the
heart instantly. A squadron of ships sent to the key asteroid Lucky has
told us of-""No," said Lucky. "No good.""Why do you say that?""We don't
want to start a war, even if it's with a victory. That's what they 0
want to do. Look here, Uncle Hector, the pirate, Dingo, might have
burned me down right there on the asteroid. Instead, he had orders to
set me adrift in space. For a while I thought that was to make my death
look like an accident. Now I feel it was intended to anger the Council.
They were going to broadcast the fact they had killed a Councilman, not
hide it, goading us into a premature attack. One of the reasons for the
Ceres Raid might have been to insure an added provocation.""And if we do
start the war with a victory?""Here on this side of the Sun? And leave
Earth on the other side stripped of important units of the fleet? With
Sirian ships waiting at Ganymede, also on the other side of the Sun? I
predict that it would be a very costly victory. Our best bet is not to
start a war, but to prevent one.""How?""Nothing will happen until
Anton's ship reaches Gany-RAID! 153mede. Suppose we intercept him and
prevent the meeting-""Interception is a long chance," said Conway
doubtfully."Not if Z go. The Shooting Starr 0 is faster and has better
Ergometrics than any ship in the fleet.""You 0 go?" cried Conway."It
would be unsafe to send fleet units. The Sirians on Ganymede would have
no way of being certain an attack wasn't heading their way. They'd have
to take counteraction and that would mean the very war we're trying to
avoid. The Shooting Starr 0 would look harmless to them. It would be one
ship. They'd stay put."Henree said, "You're overeager, Lucky. Anton has
a twelve-hour head start. Even the Shooting Starr 0 can't make that
up.""You're wrong. It can. And once I catch them, Uncle Gus, I think I
can force the asteroids into surrender. Without them Sirius won't attack
and there'll be no war."They stared at him.Lucky said earnestly, "I've
come back twice now.""Each time by half a miracle," grumbled Conway."The
other times I didn't know what I was tackling. I had to feel my way.
This time I do know. I know exactly. Look, I'll warm up the Shooting
Starr 0 and make the necessary arrangements with the Ceres Observatory
while that's taking place. You two can get on the sub-ether to Earth.
Get the Co-ordinator to-"Conway said, "I can take care of that, son.
I've been dealing with government affairs before you were born. And
Lucky, will 0 you take care of yourself?"154 LUCKY STARR"Don't I always,
Uncle Hector? Uncle Gus?" He shook hands warmly and whirled away.432 _
_432 Bigman scuffed the dust of Ceres disconsolately. He said, "I've got
my suit on. Everything.""You can't go, Bigman," said Lucky. "I'm
sorry.""Why not?""Because I'm taking a short cut to get to Ganymede.""So
what? What kind of a short cut?"Lucky smiled tightly. "I'm cutting
through the Sun!"He walked out on to the field toward the Shooting
Starr, 0 leaving Bigman standing there, mouth open.CHAPTER 14TO GANYMEDE
VIA THE SUNA three-dimensional map of the Solar System would have the
appearance of a rather flat plate. In the center would be the Sun, the
dominant member of the System. It is really 0 dominant, since it
contains 99.8% of all the matter in the Solar System. In other words, it
weighs five hundred times as much as everything else in the Solar System
put together.Around the Sun circle the planets. All of them revolve in
nearly the same plane, and this plane is called the Ecliptic.In
traveling from planet to planet space-ships usually follow the Ecliptic.
In doing so they are within the main sub-etheric beams of planetary
communication and can most conveniently make intermediate stops on the
way to their destination. Sometimes, when a ship is interested in speed
or in escaping detection, it veers away from the Ecliptic, particularly
when it must travel to the other side of the Sun.This, Lucky thought,
might be what Anton's ship was intending to do. It would lift up from
the "plate" that was the Solar System, make a huge arc or bridge above
the Sun, and come down to the "plate" on the other side, in the
neighborhood of Ganymede. Certainly Anton must have started in that
direction, or the defending forces on156 LUCKY STARRCeres wouldn't have
missed filming him. It was almost second nature for men to make all
spationautical observations along the Ecliptic first of all. By the time
they thought of turning away from the Ecliptic, Anton would have been
too far away for observation.But, thought Lucky, the chances were that
Anton would not 0 leave the Ecliptic permanently. He might have started
out as though that would be the case, but he would return. The
advantages in a return would be many. The asteroid belt extended
completely about the Sun, in the sense that asteroids were evenly
distributed all the way around. By keeping within the belt Anton could
remain among the asteroids all the way to within a hundred million miles
or so of Ganymede. This would mean security for him. The Terrestrial
government had virtually abdicated its power over the asteroids and,
except for the routes to the four large rocks, government ships did not
penetrate the area. Moreover, if one did, Anton would always be in the
position of being able to call for reinforcements from some nearby
asteroidal base.Yes, thought Lucky, Anton would remain in the belt.
Partly because he thought this, and partly because he had his own plans,
Lucky lifted the Shooting Starr 0 out of the Ecliptic in a shallow
arc.The Sun was the key. It was the key to the entire System. It was a
roadblock and a detour to every ship man could build. To travel from one
side of the System to another, a ship had to make a wide curve to avoid
the Sun. No passenger ship approached closer than sixty million miles,
the distance of Venus from the Sun. EvenTO GANYMEDE VIA THE SUN
157there, cooling systems were imperative for the comfort of the
passengers.Technical ships could be designed to make the trip to
Mercury, the distance of which from the Sun varied from forty-three
million miles in some parts of its orbit to twenty-eight million in
others. Ships had to hit it at the furthest region of its retirement
from the Sun. At closer than thirty million miles various metals
melted.Still more specialized ships were sometimes built for close-by
solar observation. Their hulls were permeated by a strong electric field
of peculiar nature which induced a phenomenon known as
"pseudo-liquefaction" in the outermost molecular skin. Heat reflection
from such a skin was almost total, so that only a tiny fraction
penetrated into the ship. From outside such ships would appear perfect
mirrors. Even so, enough heat penetrated to raise the temperature within
the ship above the boiling point of water at distances of five million
miles from the Sun, the closest recorded approach. Even if human beings
could survive such a temperature, they couldn't survive the short-wave
radiation that flooded out of the Sun and into the ship at such
distances. It could kill anything living in seconds.The disadvantage of
the Sun's position with respect to space travel was obvious in the
present instance, in which Ceres was on one side of the Sun while Earth
and Jupiter were almost diametrically opposed on the other side. If one
was in the asteroid belt, the distance from Ceres to Ganymede was about
one billion miles. If the Sun could be ignored and a ship could cut
straight across space through it, the distance would be only six158
LUCKY STARRhundred million miles, a saving of about forty per cent.This,
as far as was possible, Lucky intended to do.He drove the Shooting Starr
0 hard, virtually living in his g-harness, eating and sleeping there,
feeling the pressure of acceleration continuously. He gave himself only
fifteen minutes respite out of each hour.He passed high above the orbits
of Mars and Earth, but there was nothing to see there, not even with the
ship's telescope. Earth was on the other side of the Sun, and Mars was
at a position nearly at right angles to his own.Already the Sun was at
its normal size as seen from Earth and he could view it only through the
most strongly polarized visiplates. A little more and he would have to
use the stroboscopic attachments.The radioactivity indicators began to
chuckle occasionally. Within Earth's orbit the density of short-wave
radiation started to reach respectable values. Inside Venus's orbit
special precautions would have to be taken, such as the wearing of
lead-impregnated semi-space-suits.I, myself, thought Lucky, would have
to do better than lead. At the approach to the Sun that he would have to
make, lead would not do. Nothing material would do.For the first time
since his adventure on Mars the previous year Lucky drew out of a
special pouch glued to his waist, the flimsy, semitransparent object
obtained from the Martian energy beings.He had long since abandoned any
effort at speculation as to the method by which the object worked. It
was the development of a science that had continued for a mil-TO
GANYMEDE VIA THE SUN 159lion years longer than the science known to
Mankind and along alien paths. It was as incomprehensible to him as a
space-ship would be to a cave man, and as impossible to duplicate. But
it worked! That was what counted!He slipped it on over his head. It
molded itself to his skull as though it carried a strange life of its
own, and as it did so, light gleamed out all over him. Over his body it
was a glimmer like a billion fireflies, and it was for that reason that
Bigman referred to it as a "glimmer shield." Over his face and head it
was a solid sheet of brilliance that covered his features entirely,
without, on the other hand, preventing light from reaching his eyes.It
was an energy shield, designed by the alien Martians for Lucky's needs.
That is, it was impervious to all forms of energy other than that
required by his body, such as a certain intensity of visible light and a
certain amount of heat. Gases penetrated freely, so that Lucky could
breathe, and heated gases, in passing, were robbed of their heat and
came through cool.When the Shooting Starr 0 passed the orbit of Venus,
still heading in toward the Sun, Lucky put on his energy shield
permanently. While he wore it, he would not be able to eat or drink, but
the enforced fast would not last for more than a day, at the outside.He
was now traveling at a terrific speed, far greater than any he had
previously experienced. In addition to the slugging pull of the
hyperatomics of the Shooting Starr, 0 there was the unimaginable
attraction of the Sun's giant gravitational field. He was traveling at
millions of miles an hour now.He activated the electric field that
rendered the outer160 LUCKY STARRskin of the ship pseudo-liquid and was
grateful, as he did so, for the foresight that had made him insist on
that accessory during the building of the Shooting Starr. 0 The
thermocouple which had been registering temperatures above one hundred
degrees began to show a drop. The visiplates went dark as metal shields
passed over the thick glassite to keep them from damage and from
softening in the heat of the Sun.By the time Mercury's orbit was reached
the radiation counters had gone completely mad. Their chatter was
continuous. Lucky placed a glimmering hand over their windows and their
noise stopped. Down to the hardest gamma rays the radiation penetrating
and filling the ship was stopped by the resistance of the insubstantial
aura that surrounded his body.The temperature which had reached a low of
eighty, was climbing again, despite the mirror skin of the Shooting
Starr. 0 It passed one hundred fifty and still went up. The gravimetrics
indicated the Sun to be only ten million miles away.A shallow dish of
water, which Lucky had placed upon the table, and which had been
steaming for an hour past, was now bubbling outright. The thermocouple
reached the boiling point of water, two hundred and twelve degrees.The
Shooting Starr, 0 whipping about the Sun, was now five million miles
away. It would approach no closer. Actually it was inside the outermost
wisps of the most rarefied portion of the Sun's atmosphere, its corona.
Since the Sun was gaseous through and through (though most of it was a
gas the like of which could not exist even un-TO GANYMEDE VIA THE SUN
161der the most extreme laboratory conditions on Earth), it had no
surface, and its "atmosphere" was part of the very body of the Sun. By
going through the corona, then, Lucky was, in a way, going through the
Sun, as he had told Bigman he would.Curiosity tugged at him. No man had
ever been this close to the Sun. No man, perhaps, ever would again.
Certainly, any man who did, could not look at the Sun with his unaided
eyes. The shortest possible glimpse of the Sun's tremendous radiation at
that distance would mean instant death.But he was wearing the Martian
energy shield. Could it handle solar radiation at five million miles? He
felt he ought not take the chance and yet the impulse tugged desperately
at him. The ship's chief visiplate was outfitted with a stroboscopic
outlet-series, one which would expose, one by one, each of a series of
sixty-four outlets to the Sun, each for a millionth of a second every
four seconds. To the eye (or to the camera), it would seem a continuous
exposure, but actually any given piece of glass would only get one four
millionth of the radiation the Sun was emitting. Even that required
specially designed, nearly opaque lenses.Lucky's fingers moved
remorselessly, almost without conscious volition, to the controls. He
could not bear the thought of losing the chance. He adjusted the plate
direction toward the Sun, using the gravimetrics as indicators.Then he
turned his head away and plunged the contact home. A second passed, then
two seconds. He imagined an increase in heat on the back of his neck; he
half-waited for radiation death. Nothing happened.162 LUCKY STARRSlowly
he turned.What he saw was to stay with him the rest of his life. A
bright surface, puckered and wrinkled, filled the visi-plate. It was a
portion of the Sun. He could not see the whole, he knew, in the
visiplate, for at his distance, the Sun was twenty times as wide as it
seemed from Earth and covered four hundred times as much of the
sky.Caught in the visiplate were a pair of sunspots, black against the
brightness. Threads of glowing white curled into it and were lost. They
were heaving areas of activity that moved across the plate visibly as he
watched. This was not due to the Sun's own motion of rotation, which,
even at its equator, was not more than fourteen hundred miles an hour,
but rather to the tremendous velocity of the Shooting Starr.0As he
watched, gouts of red, naming gas shot up toward him, dim against the
blazing background, and turning a smoky black as it receded from the Sun
and cooled.Lucky shifted the plate, catching a portion of the rim of the
Sun, and now the flaming gas (which were the so-called "prominences,"
consisting of gigantic puffs of hydrogen gas) stood out sharply crimson
against the black of the sky. They spread outward in slow motion,
thinning and taking on fantastic shapes. Lucky knew that each one of
them could engulf a dozen planets the size of Earth, and that the Earth
could be dropped into the sunspot he saw without even making a
respectable splash.He closed the stroboscopics with a sudden movement.
Even though physically safe, no man could stare at theTO GANYMEDE VIA
THE SUN 163Sun from that distance without becoming oppressed by the
insignificance of Earth and all things Earthly.432 _ _432 The Shooting
Starr 0 had whipped half around the Sun and was now receding rapidly
past the orbits of Mercury and Venus. It was decelerating now. The
ship's prow opposed the direction of its flight and its powerful main
engines were acting as brakes.Once past Venus's orbit, Lucky removed his
shield and stowed it away. The ship's cooling system strained to get rid
of the excess heat. Drinking water was still uncomfortably hot and the
canned foods bulged where liquid within had bubbled into gas.The Sun was
shrinking. Lucky looked at it. It was an even, glowing sphere. Its
irregularities, its churning spots, and heaving prominences could no
longer be seen. Only its corona, always visible in space, though visible
on Earth only during eclipses, thrust out in every direction for
millions of miles. Lucky shuddered involuntarily to think that he had
passed through it.He passed within fifteen million miles of Earth, and
through his telescope he spied the familiar outlines of the continents
peeping through the ragged white masses of cloud banks. He felt a twinge
of homesickness and then a new resolve to keep war away from the
teeming, busy billions of human beings that inhabited that planet, which
was the origin of all the men that now occupied the far-flung star
systems of the Galaxy.Then the Earth, too, receded.Past Mars and back
into the asteroid belt, Lucky still aimed at the Jovian system, that
miniature solar system164 LUCKY STARRwithin the greater one. At its
center was Jupiter, larger than all the other planets combined. About it
swung four giant moons, three of them, lo, Europa, and Callisto, about
the size of the Earth's Moon, and the fourth, Ganymede, much larger.
Ganymede, in fact, was larger than Mercury, and almost as large as Mars.
In addition there were dozens of moonlets, ranging from some hundreds of
miles in diameter down to insignificant rocks.In the ship's telescope
Jupiter was a growing yellow globe, marked with faintly orange stripes,
one of which bellied out into what was once known as the "Great Red
Spot." Three of the main moons, including Ganymede, were on one side,
the fourth was on the other.Lucky had been in guarded communication with
the Council's main offices on the Moon for the better part of a day now.
His Ergometrics probed space with widely stretching fingers. It detected
many ships, but Lucky watched only for the one with the Sirian motor
pattern which he would recognize with certainty the instant it
appeared.Nor did he fail. At a distance of twenty million miles, the
first quiverings roused his suspicions. He veered in the proper
direction, and the characteristic curves grew more pronounced.At one
hundred thousand miles, his telescope showed it as a faint dot. At ten
thousand, it had form and shape and was Anton's ship.At a thousand miles
(with Ganymede still fifty million miles away from both ships), Lucky
sent out his first message, a demand that Anton turn his ship back
toward Earth.TO GANYMEDE VIA THE SUN 165At one hundred miles Lucky
received his answer-a blast of energy that made his generators whine and
shook the Shooting Starr 0 as though it had collided with another
ship.Lucky's tired face took on a drawn look.Anton's ship was
better-armed than he had expected. CHAPTER 15PART OF THE ANSWERFor an
hour the maneuvers of both ships were indecisive. Lucky had the faster
ship and the better, but Captain Anton had a crew. Each of Anton's men
could specialize. One could focus and one could release, while a third
could control the reactor banks and Anton himseh0 could direct
operations.Lucky, trying to do everything at once and by himseh0, had to
rely heavily on words."You can't get to Ganymede, Anton, and your
friends won't dare tip their hand by coming out now before they know
what's up. . . . You're all through, Anton; we know all your plans. . .
. There's no use trying to get a message through to Ganymede, Anton;
we're blanketing the sub-ether from you to Jupiter. Nothing can get
through. . . . Government ships are coming, Anton. Count your minutes.
You don't have many, unless you surrender. . . . Give up, Anton. Give
up."And all this while the Shooting Starr 0 dodged through as
concentrated a fire as Lucky had ever seen. Nor were all the blasts
successfully dodged. The Shooter's energy stores began to show the
strain. Lucky would have liked to believe that Anton's ship was
suffering equally, but he himseh0 was aiming few blasts at Anton and
landing virtually none.168 LUCKY STARRHe dared not take his eyes off the
screen. Terrestrial ships, speeding to the scene, would not be there for
hours. In those hours, if Anton beat down his energy banks, broke away,
and made good head toward Ganymede, while a limping Shooting Starr 0
could only pursue, without catching ... Or if a pirate fleet suddenly
sparkled on-screen . . .Lucky dared not follow those lines of thought
further. Perhaps he had been wrong in not entrusting the interception to
government ships in the first place. No, he told himself, only the
Shooting Starr 0 could have caught Anton still fifty million miles from
Ganymede; only the Shooter's speed; more important still, only the
Shooter's Er-gometers. At this distance from Ganymede it was safe to
call in units of the fleet for the kill. Closer to Ganymede and fleet
action would have been unsafe.Lucky's receiver, open all this time, was
suddenly activated. Anton's face filled it, smiling and carefree."You
got away from Dingo again, I see."Lucky said, "Again? You're admitting
he was working under orders in the push duel!"An energy feeler toward
Lucky's ship suddenly hardened into a beam of disruptive force. Lucky
moved aside with an acceleration that wrenched him.Anton laughed. "Don't
watch me too closely. We almost caught you then with a lulu. Certainly
Dingo was working under orders. We knew what we were doing. Dingo didn't
know who you really were, but I did. Nearly from the first.""Too bad the
knowledge didn't help you," said Lucky."It's Dingo that it hasn't
helped. It may amuse you toPART OF THE ANSWER 169know that he has been,
shall we say, executed. It's bad to make mistakes. But this kind of talk
is out of place here. I'm only plating you to say that this has been
fun, but I'll be going now.""You have nowhere to go," said Lucky."I'll
try Ganymede.""You'll be stopped.""By government ships? I don't see them
yet. And there's not one that can catch me in time.""I can catch
you.""You have caught me. But what can you do with me? From the way
you're fighting, you must be the only man on board. If I had known that
from the beginning, I wouldn't have bothered with you as long as this.
You can't fight a whole crew."Lucky said in a low, intense voice, "I can
ram you. I can smash you completely.""And yourself. Remember that.""That
wouldn't matter.""Please. You sound like a space-scout. You'll be
reciting the junior scout-patrol oath next."Lucky raised his voice. "You
men aboard the ship, listen! If your captain tries to break away in the
direction of Ganymede, I will ram the ship. It is certain death for all
of you, unless you surrender. I promise you all a fair trial. I promise
all of you the utmost consideration possible if you co-operate with us.
Don't let Anton throw your lives away for the sake of his Sirian
friends.""Talk on, government boy, talk on," said Anton. "I'm letting
them listen. They know what kind of a trial they can expect and they
know what kind of consideration,170 LUCKY STARRtoo. An injection of
enzymic poison." His fingers made the quick movements of someone
inserting a needle into another's skin. "That's what they'll get.
They're not afraid of you. Good-by, government boy."The needles on
Lucky's gravimetrics wavered downward as Anton's ship picked up speed
and moved away. Lucky watched his visiplates. Where were the government
ships? Blast all space, where were the government ships?He let
acceleration take hold. Gravimetric needles moved upward again.The miles
between the ships were sliced away. Anton's ship put on more speed; so
did the Shooting Starr. 0 But the accelerative possibilities of the
Shooter were higher.The smile on Anton's face did not alter. "Fifty
miles away," he said. Then, "Forty-five." Another pause. "Forty. Have
you said your prayers, government boy?"Lucky did not answer. For him
there was no way out. He would have to ram. Sooner than let Anton get
through, sooner than allow war to come to Earth, he would have to stop
the pirates by suicide, if there were no other way. The ships were
curving toward one another in a long, slow tangent."Thirty," said Anton
lazily. "You're not frightening anyone. You'll look a fool in the end.
Veer off and go home, Starr.""Twenty-five," retorted Lucky firmly. "You
have fifteen minutes to surrender or die." He himself, he reflected, had
the same fifteen minutes to win or die.A face appeared behind Anton's in
the visiplate. It held a finger to pale, tight lips. Lucky's eyes might
have flick-PART OF THE ANSWER171ered. He tried to conceal that by
looking away, then coming back.Both ships were at maximum
acceleration."What's the matter, Starr?" asked Anton. "Scared? Heart
beating fast?" His eyes were dancing and his lips were parted.Lucky had
the sudden, sure knowledge that Anton was enjoying this, that he
considered it an exciting game, that it was only a device whereby he
might demonstrate his power. Lucky knew at that moment that Anton would
never surrender, that he would allow himself to be rammed rather than
back away. And Lucky knew that there was no escape from death."Fifteen
miles," Lucky said.It was Hansen's face behind Anton. The hermit's! And
there was something in his hand."Ten miles," said Lucky. Then, "Six
minutes. I'll ram you. By space, I'll ram you."It was a blaster! Hansen
held a blaster.Lucky's breath came tightly. If Anton turned . . .But
Anton was not going to miss a second of Lucky's face if he could help
it. He was waiting to see the fright come and grow. To Lucky, that was
plain as could be in the pirate's expression. Anton would not have
turned for a much noisier event than the careful lifting of a
blaster.Anton caught it in the back. Death came too suddenly for the
eager smile to disappear from his face, and though life left it, the
look of cruel joy did not. Anton fell forward across the visiplate and
for a moment his face remained pressed there, larger than life-size,
leering at Lucky out of dead eyes.172 LUCKY STARRLucky heard Hansen's
shout, "Back, all of you. Do you want to die? We're giving up. Come and
get us, Starr!"Lucky veered the direction of acceleration by two
degrees. Enough to miss.His Ergometers were registering the motors of
approaching government ships strongly now. They were coming at last.The
screens on Anton's ship were glowing white as a sign of surrender.432 _
_432 It was almost an axiom that the fleet was never entirely pleased
when the Council of Science interfered too much in what they considered
to be the province of the military. Especially so when the interference
was spectacularly successful. Lucky Starr knew that well. He was quite
prepared for the admiral's poorly hidden disapproval.The admiral said,
"Dr. Conway has explained the situation adequately, Starr, and we
commend you for your actions. However, you must realize that the fleet
has been aware of the Sirian danger for some time now and had a careful
program of its own. These independent actions on the part of the Council
can be harmful. You might mention that to Dr. Conway. Now I have been
requested by the Co-ordinator to co-operate with the Council in the next
stages of the fight against the pirates, but," he looked stubborn, "I
cannot agree to your suggestion that we delay an attack on Ganymede. I
think the fleet is capable of making its own decisions where battle, and
victory are concerned."The admiral was in his fifties and unused to
consultingPART OF THE ANSWER 173on equal terms with anyone, let alone a
youngster of half his age. His square-cut face with its bristly gray
mustache showed it.Lucky was tired. The reaction, now that Anton's ship
had been taken in tow and its crew in custody, had set in. He managed,
however, to be very respectful. He said, "I think that if we mop up the
asteroids first, the Sirians on Ganymede will automatically cease being
a problem.""Good Galaxy, man, how do you mean 'mop up.' We've been
trying to do that for twenty-five years without success. Mopping up the
asteroids is like chasing feathers. As for the Sirian base, we know
where it is, and we have a good notion as to its strength." He smiled
briefly. "Oh, it may be hard for the Council to realize this, but the
fleet is on its toes as well as they are. Perhaps even more so. For
instance, I know that the power at my command is enough to break their
strength on Ganymede. We are ready for the battle.""I have no doubt that
you are and that you can defeat the Sirians. But the ones on Ganymede
are not all the Sirians there are. You may be ready for a battle, but
are you ready for a long and costly war?"The admiral reddened. "I have
been asked to cooperate, but I cannot do so at the risk of Earth's
safety. I can under no conditions lend my voice to a plan which involves
dispersing our fleet among the asteroids, while a Sirian expedition is
in being in the Solar System.""May I have an hour?" interrupted Lucky.
"One hour to speak with Hansen, the Cerean captive I had brought aboard
this ship just before you boarded, sir?"174 LUCKY STARR"How will that
help?""May I have an hour to show you?"The admiral's lips pressed
together. "An hour may be valuable. It may be priceless. . . . Well,
begin, but quickly. Let's see how it goes.""Hansen!" called Lucky
without taking his calm eyes from the admiral.The hermit entered from
the bunk room. He looked tired, but managed a smile for Lucky. His stay
on the pirate ship had apparently left his spirits unmarked.He said,
"I've been admiring your ship, Mr. Starr. It's quite a piece of
metal.""Look here," said the admiral, "none of that. Get on with it,
Starr! Never mind your ship."Lucky said, "This is the situation, Mr.
Hansen. We've stopped Anton, with your invaluable help, for which I
thank you. That means we've delayed the start of hostilities with
Sirius. However, we need more than delay. We must remove the danger
completely, and as the admiral will tell you, our time is very
short.""How can I help?" asked Hansen."By answering my
questions.""Gladly, but I've told you all I know. I'm sorry that it
turned out to be worth so little.""Yet the pirates believed you to be a
dangerous man. They risked a great deal to get you out of our hands.""I
can't explain that.""Is it possible that you have a piece of knowledge
without being aware of it? Something that could be deadly for them?""I
don't see how."PART OF THE ANSWER 175"Well, they trusted you. By the
information you yourself gave me, you were rich; a man with good
investments on Earth. Certainly you were much better off than the
average hermit. Yet the pirates treated you well. Or at least they
didn't mistreat you. They didn't rifle your belongings. In fact, they
left your very luxurious home completely in peace.""Remember, Mr. Starr,
I helped them in return.""Not very much. You said that you allowed them
to land on your rock, to leave people there sometimes and that's about
all. If they had simply shot you down, they could have had that and your
quarters as well. In addition, they would not have had to worry about
your becoming an informer. You eventually did become one, you
know."Hansen's eyes shifted. "That's the way it was, though. I told you
the truth.""Yes, what you told me was true. It wasn't the whole truth,
however. I say that there must have been a good reason for the pirates
to trust you so completely. They must have known that it meant your life
to go to the government.""I told you that," said Hansen mildly."You said
that you had incriminated yourself by helping the pirates, but they
trusted you when they first arrived, before 0 you had begun helping
them. Otherwise they would have blasted you to begin with. Now, let me
guess. I'd say that once, before you became a hermit, you were a pirate
yourself, Hansen, and that Anton and men like him knew about it. What do
you say?"Hansen's face went white.176 LUCKY STARRLucky said, "What do
you say, Hansen?"Hansen's voice was very soft. "You are right, Mr.
Starr. I was once a member of the crew of a pirate ship. That was a long
time ago. I have tried to live it down. I retired to the asteroids and
did my best to be dead as far as Earth was concerned. When a new group
of pirates arose in the Solar System and entangled me, I had no choice
but to play along with them."When you landed, I found my first chance to
leave; my first chance to take the risk of facing the law. Twenty-five
years had passed, after all. And I would have in my favor the fact that
I had risked my life to save the life of a Councilman. That was why I
was so anxious to fight the pirate raiders on Ceres. I wanted to make
another point in my favor. Finally, I killed Anton, saving your life a
second time, and giving Earth a breathing space, you tell me, in which a
war may be prevented. I was a pirate, Mr. Starr, but that's gone, and I
think I've evened the score.""Good," said Lucky, "as far as it goes. Now
do you have any information for us that you didn't mention
before?"Hansen shook his head.Lucky said, "You didn't tell us you were a
pirate.""That was irrelevant, really. And you found out for yourself. I
didn't try to deny it.""Well, then let's see if we can find anything
else which you won't deny. You see, you still haven't told the whole
truth."Hansen looked surprised. "What remains?""The fact that you've
never stopped being a pirate.fVPART OF THE ANSWER 177The fact that you
are a person that was only mentionedonce in my hearing, and that by one
of Anton's crewmen; shortly after my push-gun duel with Dingo. The factI
that you are the so-called Boss. You, Mr. Hansen, are themastermind of
the asteroid pirates." CHAPTER 16ALL OF THE ANSWERHansen jumped out of
his seat, and remained standing. His breath whistled harshly through
parted lips.The admiral, scarcely less astonished, cried, "Great Galaxy,
man! What is this? Are you serious?"Lucky said, "Sit down, Hansen, and
let's try it on for size. Let's see how it sounds. If I'm wrong,
there'll be a contradiction somewhere. It begins with Captain Anton,
landing on the Atlas. 0 Anton was an intelligent and capable man, even
if his mind was twisted. He mistrusted me and my story. He took a
trimensional photograph of me (that wouldn't be hard, even without my
noticing) and sent it to the Boss for instructions. The Boss thought he
recognized me. Certainly, Hansen, if you were the Boss, that would
follow, because as a matter of fact, when you saw me face to face later,
you did 0 recognize me."The Boss sent back a message to the effect that
I was to be killed. It amused Anton to do that by sending me out in a
push-gun duel with Dingo. Dingo was given definite instructions to kill
me. Anton admitted that in our last conversation. Then, when I returned,
with Anton's word that I was to be given a chance to join the
organization if I survived, you had to take over yourself. I was sent to
your rock."180 LUCKY STARRHansen burst out, "But this is mad. I did you
no harm. I saved you. I brought you back to Ceres.""So you did, and came
along with me, too. Now it had been my idea to get into the pirate
organization, learn the facts from within. You got the same idea in
reverse and were more successful. You brought me to Ceres and came
yourself. You learned how unprepared we were and how we underestimated
the pirate organization. It meant you could go ahead at full speed."The
Ceres Raid makes sense now. I imagine you got word to Anton somehow.
Pocket sub-etherics are not unheard of and clever codes can be worked
out. You went up the corridors not 0 to fight the pirates but to join
them. They didn't kill you, they 'captured' you. That was very queer. If
your story were true, you would have been a dangerous informer to them.
They should have blasted you the moment you came within range. Instead
they did not harm you. Instead, they put you on Anton's flagship and
took you with them to Ganymede. You weren't even bound or under
surveillance. It was perfectly possible for you to move quietly behind
Anton and shoot him down."Hansen cried, "But I did shoot him. Why in the
name of Earth would I have shot him if I were who you say I am?""Because
he was a maniac. He was ready to let me ram him rather than back down or
lose face. You had greater plans and had no intention of dying to soothe
his vanity. You knew that even if we stopped Anton from contacting
Ganymede, it would mean only a delay. By attacking Ganymede afterward,
we would provoke the warALL OF THE ANSWER 181anyway. Then by continuing
your role as hermit, you would eventually find a chance to escape and
take on your real identity. What was Anton's life and the loss of one
ship compared with all that?"Hansen said, "What proof is there to all
this? It's guesswork, that's all! Where's the proof?"The admiral, who
had been looking from one to the other through all of this, bestirred
himself. "Look here, Starr, this man's mine. We'll get whatever truth is
in him.""No hurry, Admiral. My hour isn't up. . . . Guesswork, Hansen?
Let's go on. I tried to get back to your rock, Hansen, but you didn't
have the co-ordinates, which was strange, despite your painstaking
explanations. I calculated out a set of co-ordinates from the trajectory
we had taken going from your rock to Ceres, and those turned out to be
in a forbidden zone, where no asteroids could be in the ordinary course
of nature. Since I was certain that my calculations were correct, I knew
that your rock had been where it was against 0 the ordinary course of
nature.""Eh? What?" said the admiral."I mean that a rock need not travel
in its orbit if it's small enough. It can be fitted with hyperatomic
motors and can move out of its orbit like a space-ship. 0 How else can
you explain an asteroid being in a forbidden zone."Hansen said wildly,
"Saying so doesn't make it so. I don't know why you're doing this to me,
Starr. Are you testing me? Is it a trick?""No trick, Mr. Hansen," said
Lucky. "I went back for your rock. I didn't think you'd move it far. An
asteroid182 LUCKY STARRthat can move has certain advantages. No matter
how often it is detected, its co-ordinates noted and its orbit
calculated, observers or pursuers can always be thrown off by movement
out of the orbit. Still, a moving asteroid runs certain risks. An
astronomer at a telescope, happening to observe it at the time, might
wonder why an asteroid should be moving out of the Ecliptic or into a
forbidden zone. Or, if he were close enough, he would wonder why an
asteroid should have reactor exhaust glow at one end."You had already
moved once, I imagine, to meet Anton's ship part way so that I could be
landed on your rock. I was certain you would not move very far so soon
after. Perhaps just far enough to get into the nearest cluster of
asteroids for camouflage purposes. So I returned and searched among the
asteroids nearest at hand for one that was the right size and shape. I
found it. I found an asteroid that was actually a base, factory, and
storehouse all at once, and on it I heard the sound of giant
hyperatomics perfectly capable of moving it through space. A Sirian
importation, I think."Hansen said, "But that wasn't my 0 rock.""No? I
found Dingo waiting on it. He boasted that he had had no need to follow
me; that he knew where I was heading. The only place to which he knew I
was heading was your rock. From that I conclude that one and the same
rock had your living quarters at one end and the pirate base at the
other.""No. No," shouted Hansen. "I leave it to the admiral. There are a
thousand asteroids the size and shape ofALL OF THE ANSWER183mine, and
I'm not responsible for some casual remark made by a pirate.""There's
another piece of evidence that may sound better to you," said Lucky. "On
the pirate base was a valley between two outcroppings of rock; a valley
full of used cans.""Used cans!" shouted the admiral. "What in the Galaxy
has that to do with anything, Starr?""Hansen discarded his used cans
into a valley on his own rock. He said he didn't like his rock to be
accompanied by its own garbage. Actually he probably didn't want it
surrounding his rock and advertising it. I saw the valley of the cans
when we were leaving his rock. I saw them again when I approached the
pirate base. It was the reason I chose that asteroid to reconnoiter and
no other. Look at this man, Admiral, and tell me whether you can doubt
that I have the truth."Hansen's face was contorted with fury. He was not
the same man. All trace of benevolence was gone. "All right. What of it?
What do you want?""I want you to call Ganymede. I'm sure you conducted
previous negotiations with them. They'll know you. Tell them that the
asteroids are surrendering to Earth and will join us against Sirius if
necessary."Hansen laughed. "Why should I? You've got me, but you haven't
got the asteroids. You can't clean them out.""We can, if we capture your
rock. It has all necessary records on it, hasn't it?""Try and find it,"
said Hansen, hoarsely. "Try to locate it in a forest of rocks. You say
yourself it can move."184 LUCKY STARR"It will be easy to find," said
Lucky. "Your valley of cans, you know.""Go ahead. Look at every rock
till you find the valley. It will take you a million years.""No. Only a
day or so. When I left the pirate base, I paused just long enough to
burn the valley of cans with a heat beam. I melted them and let them
freeze back into a bumpy, angled sheet of fresh, gleaming metal. There
was no atmosphere to rust or corrode them, so its surface remains just
like the metal-foil goal posts used in a push-gun duel. It catches the
Sun and sends reflections glittering back in tight beams. All Ceres
Observatory has to do is quarter the heavens, looking for an asteroid
about ten times as bright as it should be for its size. I had them begin
the search even before I left to intercept Anton."'abT. ' 1_ 'bbIt s a
lie."Is it? Long before I reached the Sun, I received a sub-etheric
message that included a photograph. Here it is." Lucky drew it out from
under the blotter on the desk. "The bright dot with the arrow pointing
to it is your rock.""Do you think you're frightening me?""I should be.
Council ships landed on it.""What?" roared the admiral."There was no
time to waste, sir," said Lucky. "We found Hansen's living quarters at
the other end and we found the connecting tunnels between it and the
pirate base. I have here some sub-etherized documents containing the
co-ordinates of your main subsidiary bases,ALL OF THE ANSWER185Hansen,
and some photographs of the bases themselves. The real thing,
Hansen?"Hansen collapsed. His mouth opened and hopeless sobbing sounds
came out.Lucky said, "I've gone through all this, Hansen, to convince
you that you've lost. You've lost completely and finally. You have
nothing left but your life. I make no promises, but if you do as I say,
you may end up by at least saving that. Call Ganymede."Hansen stared
helplessly at his fingers.The admiral said with stunned anguish, "The
Council cleaned out the asteroids? They've done the job? They haven't
consulted the Admiralty?"Lucky said, "How about it, Hansen?"Hansen said,
"What's the difference now? I'll do it."432 * *432 Conway, Henree, and
Bigman were at the space-port to greet Lucky when he returned to Earth.
They had dinner together in the Glass Room on the highest level of
Planet Restaurant. With the room's walls made of curving, clear one-way
glass, they could look out over the warm lights of the city, fading off
into the level plains beyond.Henree said, "It's fortunate the Council
was able to penetrate the pirate bases before it became a job for the
fleet. Military action wouldn't have solved the matter."Conway nodded.
"You're right. It would have left the asteroids vacant for the next
pirate gang. Most of those people there had no real knowledge that they
were fighting alongside Sirius. They were rather ordinary people186
LUCKY STARRlooking for a better life than they had been experiencing. I
think we can persuade the government to offer amnesty to all but those
who had actually participated in raids, and they weren't many.""As a
matter of fact," said Lucky, "by helping them continue the development
of the asteroids, by financing the expansion of their yeast farms, and
supplying water, air, and power, we're building a defense for the
future. The best protection against asteroid criminals is a peaceful and
prosperous asteroid community. That way lies peace."Bigman said
belligerently, "Don't kid yourself. It's peace only till Sirius decides
to try again."Lucky put a hand to the little man's frowning face and
shoved it playfully. "Bigman, I think you're sorry we're short one nice
war. What's the matter with you? Can't you enjoy a little rest?"Conway
said, "You know, Lucky, you might have told us more at the time.""I
would have liked to," said Lucky, "but it was necessary for me to deal
with Hansen alone. There were important personal reasons involved.""But
when did you first suspect him, Lucky? What gave him away?" Conway
wanted to know. "The fact that his rock had blundered into a forbidden
zone?""That was the final straw," admitted Lucky, "but I knew he was no
mere hermit within an hour after meeting him. I knew from that time on
that he was more important to me than anyone else in the Galaxy.""How
about explaining that?" Conway sank his fork into the last of the steak
and munched away contentedly.ALL OF THE ANSWER 187Lucky said, "Hansen
recognized me as the son of Lawrence Starr. He said he had met Father
once, and he must have. After all, Councilmen get no publicity and a
personal greeting is necessary to explain the fact that he could see the
resemblance in my face."But there were two queer angles to the
recognition. He saw the resemblance most clearly when I grew angry. He
said that. Yet from what you tell me, Uncle Hector, and you, Uncle Gus,
Father hardly ever got angry. 'Laughing' is the adjective you usually
use when you talk about Father. Then, too, when Hansen arrived on Ceres,
he recognized neither of you. Even hearing your names meant
nothing.""What's wrong with that?" asked Henree."Father and you two were
always together, weren't you? How could Hansen have met Father and not
you two. Met my father, moreover, at a time when he was angry and under
circumstances which fixed his face so firmly in Hansen's mind that he
could recognize me from the resemblance twenty-five years later."There's
only one explanation. My father was separated from you two only on his
last flight to Venus, and Hansen had been in at the kill. Nor was he
there as an ordinary crewman. Ordinary crewmen don't become rich enough
to be able to build a luxurious asteroid and spend twenty-five years
after the government's raids on the asteroids building a new and bigger
organization from scratch. He must have been the captain of the
attacking pirate ship. He would have been thirty years old then; quite
old enough to be captain.""Great space!" said Conway blankly.188 LUCKY
STARRBigman yelled indignantly, "And you never shot him down?""How could
I? I had bigger affairs at hand than squaring a personal grudge. He
killed my father and mother, yes, but I had to be polite to him just the
same. At least for a while."Lucky lifted a cup of coffee to his lips and
paused to look down at the city again.He said, "Hansen will be in the
Mercury Prison for the rest of his life, which is better punishment
really than a quick, easy death. And the Sirians have left Ganymede, so
there'll be peace. That's a better reward for me than his death ten
times over; and a better offering to the memory of my parents."THE END}
 
