{112520{} {;000;255255255;00255;128128128;} 4123601103312060 ISAAC
ASIMOV0020236010902360 16 BLACK WIDOWERS000202360357111019 A FAWCETT
CREST BOOK002023602351519 Fawcett Publications, Inc., Greenwich,
Connecticut0020236022131919 TALES OF THE BLACK
WIDOWERS000202360235236024023602261719 Copyright 'a9 1971, 1972, 1973,
1974 by Isaac Asimov0020236024523602401319 ISBN
0-449-22944-000202360240236043002023601824 to David Ford000201324 and to
the Trap-Door Spiders 4 for reasons detailed in the
introduction000202360191223Special Note000202360191319 The erudite copy
reader points out that since the 2 stories that follow were written for
separate publication in a magazine originally, I identify the con3
tinuing characters each time, and do it repetitious-ly. He pointed out
several of the more nauseating 1 examples of this and, with reverence
for his exalted 3 position, I corrected the matter in accordance with 2
his suggestions. There undoubtedly remain some 5 dozens of repetitions
that could bear revision, but 6 I hate to introduce too many changes
from the 1 pristine originals. Would you forgive me, then, for 4
permitting them to stay?0020236014222360 Contents00020123
INTRODUCTION90202{0 1.}{*02881} 36051{0 2.}PH AS IN PHONY0-7 282{0
3.}{*02881} 3603{0 4.}GO, LITTLE BOOK!0-7 59-52{0 5.}EARLY SUNDAY
MORNING0-9 793{0 6.}THE OBVIOUS FACTOR0-7 96-123{0 7.}THE POINTING
FINGER0-11 113-7-4{0 8.}MISS WHAT?0-9 130-122{0 9.}{*02881}
36053600022{0 10.}{*039410} 360-2{0 11.}THE CURIOUS OMISSION0-20 18
6-120{0 12.}OUT OF SIGHT-6 205-102360-330Introduction000236015 Because I
have a friendly and personal writing style, -1 readers have a tendency
to write to me in a friendly and 0 personal way, asking all kinds of
friendly and personal -1 questions. And because I really am what my
writing style, 5 such as it is, portrays me to be, I answer those
letters. 3 And since I don't have a secretary or any form of assis0 tant
whatever, it takes a lot of the time I should be devoting to writing.01
It is only natural, then, that I have taken to writing in1 troductions
to my books in an attempt to answer some of 5 the anticipated questions
in advance, thus forestalling -1 some of the letters.0015 For instance,
because I write in many fields, I fre-1 quently get questions such as
these:001 "Why do you, a lowly science fiction writer, think you 2 can
write a two-volume work on Shakespeare?"001-1 "Why do you, a
Shakespearean scholar, choose to write -2 science fiction
thrillers?"0017 "What gives you, a biochemist, the nerve to write 0
books on history?"01 "What makes you, a mere historian, think you know
-1 anything about science?"0011 And so on, and so on.001-1 It seems
certain, then, that I will be asked, either with 1 amusement or with
exasperation, why I am writing mys-2 tery stories.001-1 Here goes,
then.001-1 I started my writing career in science fiction, and I still 3
write science fiction when I can, for it remains my first -2 and chief
literary love. However, I am interested in many 1 things and among them
has been the mystery. I have been 0 reading mysteries almost as long as
I have been reading -1 science fiction. I remember risking my life when,
as a 2 ten-year-old, I pilfered forbidden copies of The Shadow -10 from
under my father's pillow when he was taking his af2 ternoon nap. (I
asked him why he 0 read it if I was forbid1 den, and he said he needed
it in order to learn English, 5 whereas I had the advantage of school.
What a rotten 2 reason I thought that was.)001 In writing science
fiction, then, I frequently introduced -4 the mystery motif. Two of my
novels, The Caves of Steel 70 (Doubleday, 1953) and The Naked Sun 0
(Doubleday, 2 1957), are full-fledged murder mysteries for all that they
-1 are science fiction as well. I have written enough shorter science
fiction mysteries of one sort or another to make it -2 possible to
publish a collection of them as Asimov's Mys-1 teries 0 (Doubleday,
1968).0014 I also wrote a "straight" mystery novel, The Death 0 Dealers
0 (Avon, 1958),5 [Well, it was rejected by Doubleday, if you must know]0
which was eventually reissued in 5 1968 by Walker & Company under my own
title of A -2 Whiff of Death. 0 This, however, dealt entirely with
science 5 and scientists and its atmosphere was still that of the 3
science fiction novel, as was true of two mystery short -1 stories I
sold to mystery magazines.001 Increasingly, I felt the itch to write
mysteries that had -1 nothing to do with science. One thing that held me
back, 3 though, was the fact that the mystery had evolved in the 6 last
quarter-century and my tastes had not. Mysteries 2 these days are
heavily drenched in liquor, injected with 3 drugs, marinated in sex, and
roasted in sadism, whereas 7 my detective ideal is Hercule Poirot and
his little gray -7 cells.0012 But then, back in 1971, I received a
letter from that gorgeous blond young lady, Eleanor Sullivan, who is 0
managing editor of Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine 0 (or 3EQMM 0 for
short), asking if I would consider writing a 7 short story for the
magazine. Of course, I jubilantly 0 agreed, because I thought that if
they asked 0 for one, they 1 couldn't possibly have the cruelty to
reject it once written, 2 and that meant I could safely write my own
kind of story -1 -very cerebral.001-1 I began revolving plot
possibilities in my head rather 1 anxiously, for I wanted something with
a reasonable twist -2 to it and Agatha Christie, all by herself, had
already used virtually all possible twists.001-1 While the wheels were
slowly turning in the recesses of 1 my mind, I happened to be visiting
the actor David Ford 2 (who was in both the Broadway and Hollywood
versions of 1776). 0 His apartment is filled with all kinds of inter6
esting oddities, and he told me that he was convinced 2 once that
someone had taken something from his apart1 ment but he could never be
sure because he couldn't tell -4 whether anything was missing.001-2 I
laughed and all the wheels in my head, heaving a col0 lective sigh of
relief, stopped turning. I had my twist.014 I then needed a background
against which to display -1 the twist and here we have something
else.0012 Back in the early 1940's, legend has it, someone got 0 married
to a lady who found her husband's friends unacceptable, and vice versa.
In order to avoid breaking off a 2 valued relationship, those friends
organized a club with3 out officers or bylaws for the sole purpose of
having a dinner once a month. It would be a stag organization so that
the husband in question could be invited to join and 0 his wife
legitimately requested not to attend. (Nowadays, 6 with Women's Lib so
powerful, this might not have 1 worked.)0016 The organization was named
the Trap-Door Spiders 1 (or TDS, for short) probably because the members
felt -1 themselves to be hiding.0011 Thirty years have passed since the
TDS was organized -1 but it still exists. It is still stag, though the
member whose 0 marriage inspired the organization is long since
divorced. 7 (As a concession to male non-chauvinism, a cocktail 3 party
was given on February 3 1973, at which the TDS 0 wives could meet one
another-and this may become an -1 annual custom.)0016 Once a month, the
TDS meets, always on a Friday 1 night, almost always in Manhattan,
sometimes in a res2 taurant, sometimes in a member's apartment. Each
meeting is co-hosted by two volunteers who bear all the ex1 penses for
the occasion and who may each bring a guest. 0 The average attendance is
twelve. There are drinks and 3 conversation from 6:30 to 7:30 p.m.; 0
food and conversa9 tion from 7:30 to 8:30 p.m.; 0 and just conversation
-1 thereafter.001 After the meal each guest is grilled on his interests,
his 1 profession, his hobbies, his views, and the results are al-1 most
always interesting, often fascinating.0012 The chief among the general
eccentricities of the TDS 7 are these: (1) Every member is addressed as
"Doctor" 1 by the others, the title going along with the membership, 0
and (2) each member is supposed to try to arrange for a mention of the
TDS in his obituary.013 I had been a guest myself on two different
occasions, 0 and when I moved to New York in1024 1033 1970, I was
elected to -2 membership.0012 Well, then, thought I, why not tell my
mystery story -1 against the background of the meeting of an
organization 4 something like the TDS? My club would be called the 1
Black Widowers and I would cut it in half to make it 0 manageable-six
people and one host.014 Naturally, there are differences. The members of
the 0 TDS have never, in real life, attempted to solve mysteries 5 and
none of them is as idiosyncratic as the members of 6 the Black Widowers.
In fact, the members of the TDS 0 are, one and all, lovable people and
there is a mutual af3 fection that is touching to see. Therefore, please
be as2 sured that the characters and events in the stories in this 7
book are my own invention and are not to be equated 6 with anyone or
anything in the TDS, except insofar as -1 they may seem intelligent or
lovable.0014 In particular, Henry, the waiter, is my own invention 1 and
has no analogue, however remote, in the TDS.0012 So, having my plot and
my background, I wrote a story00124 I named "The Chuckle." It was
accepted by 4EQMM, 0 which renamed it "The Acquisitive Chuckle." 10240
1033 [EQMM 0 invariably changes my titles. This doesn't bother me,
because I always look forward to book publication, in which I can 4
change the titles back to what they should be. Sometimes I don't, as, on
rare occasions, an editorial change of title meets my ap3 proval. For
instance, I really think "The Acquisitive Chuckle" is 6 better than "The
Chuckle," so I am keeping that.]0018 After the first sale, there was no
stopping me, of -1 course. I began to write one Black Widower tale after
an6 other and in little more than a year I had written eight 0 and sold
each of them to EQMM.001-1 The trouble was that, even though I was
holding myself 1 back, and not writing as many as I wanted to write, I
was 5 still producing them faster than EQMM 0 could publish -3 them.0016
I finally broke under the strain of not-writing, so I 1 wrote three
more, at my natural rate of production, and 4 decided not to plague the
magazine with them. Then I 3 wrote a fourth and sold it to them. That
brought the total 1 to twelve, with enough wordage for a book. My loyal
-2 publishers, Doubleday & Company, had been waiting patiently in the
wings ever since the first story, so I am now 2 putting them together as
Tales of the Black Widowers0 - 0 and here you are.01-2 Any questions? 0
[1024 1033 I hope not.]2360101-4The Acquisitive Chuckle00023601 Hanley
Bartram was the guest, that night, of the Black 5 Widowers, who monthly
met in their quiet haunt and 3 vowed death to any female who
intruded-for that one 1 night per month, at any rate.0012 The number of
attendees varied: five members were 0 present on this occasion.01-1
Geoffrey Avalon was host for the evening. He was tall, 5 with a neatly
trimmed mustache and a smallish beard, 2 more white than black now, but
with hair nearly as black -4 as ever.001 As host, it was his duty to
deliver the ritual toast that 2 marked the beginning of the dinner
proper. Loudly, and with gusto, he said, "To Old King Cole of sacred
memo0 ry. May his pipe be forever lit, his bowl forever full, his 3
fiddlers forever in health, and may we all be as merry as 0 he all our
lives long."01 Each cried, "Amen," touched his lips to drink, and sat 1
down. Avalon put his drink to the side of his plate. It was -2 his
second and was now exactly half full. It would remain 4 there throughout
the dinner and was not to be touched -1 again. He was a patent lawyer
and he carried over into his 0 social life the minutiae of his work. One
and a half drinks -1 was precisely what he allowed himself on these
occasions.0015 Thomas Trumbull came storming up the stairs at the 4 last
minute, with the usual cry of "Henry, a scotch and 1 soda for a dying
man."0013 Henry, the waiter at these functions for several years 1 now
(and with no last name that any Black Widower had 5 ever heard used),
had the scotch and soda in readiness. 6 He was sixtyish but his face was
unwrinkled and staid.0011 His voice seemed to recede into the distance
even as he 2 spoke. "Right here, Mr. Trumbull."0014 Trumbull spotted
Bartram at once and said to Avalon 1 in an aside, "Your guest?"0013 "He
asked to come," said Avalon, in as near a whisper 0 as he could manage.
"Nice fellow. You'll like him."01-2 The dinner itself went as
miscellaneously as the Black 0 Widowers' affairs usually did. Emmanuel
Rubin, who had 2 the other beard-a thin and scraggly one under a mouth 3
with widely spaced teeth-had broken out of a writer's -3 block and was
avidly giving the details of the story he had 4 finished. James Drake,
with a rectangular face, a mustache but no beard, was interrupting with
memories of 1 other stories, tangentially related. Drake was only an or2
ganic chemist but he had an encyclopedic knowledge of -3 pulp
fiction.0011 Trumbull, as a code expert, considered himself to be in the
inner councils of government and took it into his head 2 to be outraged
at Mario Gonzalo's political pronounce0 ments. "God damn it," he yelled,
in one of his less vitu1 perative moods, "why don't you stick to your
idiotic col-1 lages and your burlap bags and leave world affairs to your
0 betters?"014 Trumbull had not recovered from Gonzalo's one-man 5 art
show earlier that year, and Gonzalo, understanding 3 this, laughed
good-naturedly, and said, "Show me my 1 betters. Name one."0015 Bartram,
short and plump, with hair that curled in -1 ringlets, clung firmly to
his role as guest. He listened to 0 everyone, smiled at everyone, and
said little.012 Eventually the time came when Henry poured the cof-1 fee
and began to place the desserts before each guest with 2 practiced
legerdemain. It was at this moment that the 0 traditional grilling of
the guest was supposed to begin.011 The initial questioner, almost by
tradition (on those 2 occasions when he was present), was Thomas
Trumbull. His swarthy face, wrinkled into a perennial discontent, looked
angry as he began with the invariable opening 3 question: "Mr. Bartram,
how do you justify your exis-2 tence?"001 Bartram smiled. He spoke with
precision as he said, "I 2 have never tried. My clients, on those
occasions when 1 -1 give satisfaction, find my existence justified."001
"Your clients?" said Rubin. "What is it you do, Mr. 1 Bartram?"0011 "I
am a private investigator."0015 "Good," said James Drake. "I don't think
we've ever had one before. Manny, you can get some of the data 7 correct
for a change when you write your tough-guy 2 crap."0011 "Not from me,"
said Bartram quickly.0014 Trumbull scowled. "If you don't mind,
gentlemen, as 1 the appointed grillster, please leave this to me. Mr.
Bar-1 tram, you speak of the occasions upon which you give satisfaction.
Do you always give satisfaction?"0017 "There are times when the matter
can be debated," 1 said Bartram. "In fact, I would like to speak to you
this 0 evening concerning an occasion that was particularly 4
questionable. It may even be that one of you might be 1 useful in that
connection. It was with that in mind that I 0 asked my good friend Jeff
Avalon to invite me to a meet4 ing, once I learned the details of the
organization. He 3 obliged and I am delighted."001-1 "Are you ready now
to discuss this dubious satisfaction 0 you gave or did not give, as the
case may be?"01-1 "Yes, if you will allow me."0013 Trumbull looked at
the others for signs of dissent. 4 Gonzalo's prominent eyes were fixed
on Bartram as he 3 said, "May we interrupt?" Quickly, and with an
admira-1 ble economy of strokes, he was doodling a caricature of 1
Bartram on the back of his menu card. It would join the 0 others which
memorialized guests and which marched in brave array across the walls.01
"Within reason," said Bartram. He paused to sip at his -1 coffee and
then said, "The story begins with Anderson, to 0 whom I shall refer only
in that fashion. He was an acquis1 itor."0011 "An inquisitor?" asked
Gonzalo, frowning.0011 "An ac0 quisitor. He gained things, he earned
them, he 4 bought them, he picked them up, he collected them. The00 16
world moved in one direction with respect to him; it moved toward him;
never away. He had a house into 5 which this flood of material, of
varying value, came to 0 rest and never moved again. Through the years,
it grew 5 steadily thicker and amazingly heterogeneous. He also 1 had a
business partner, whom I shall call only Jackson."001 Trumbull
interrupted, frowning, not because there was 1 anything to frown about,
but because he always frowned. 2 He said, "Is this a true story?"001 "I
tell only true stories," said Bartram slowly and pre1 cisely. "I lack
the imagination to lie."001 "Is it confidential?"013 "I shall not tell
the story in such a way as to make it easily recognized, but were it to
be recognized, it would -1 be confidential."0013 "I follow the
subjunctive," said Trumbull, "but I wish 5 to assure you that what is
said within the walls of this 0 room is never repeated, nor referred to,
however tangen-2 tially, outside its walls. Henry understands this,
too."0012 Henry, who was refilling two of the coffeecups, smiled 0 a
little and bent his head in agreement.012 Bartram smiled also and went
on, "Jackson had a dis0 ease, too. He was honest; unavoidably and deeply
honest. 1 The characteristic permeated his soul as though, from an early
age, he had been marinated in integrity.0012 "To a man like Anderson, it
was most useful to have 3 honest Jackson as partner, for their business,
which I carefully do not describe in detail, required contact with 0 the
public. Such contact was not for Anderson, for his -1 acquisitiveness
stood in the way. With each object he ac4 quired, another little crease
of slyness entered his face, 3 until it seemed a spider's web that
frightened all flies at 4 sight. It was Jackson, the pure and the
honest, who was 6 the front man, and to whom all widows hastened with 1
their mites, and orphans with their farthings.0012 "On the other hand,
Jackson found Anderson a neces4 sity, too, for Jackson, with all his
honesty, perhaps be3 cause of it, had no knack for making one dollar
become 2 two. Left to himself, he would, entirely without meaning 12 to,
lose every cent entrusted to him and would then00 1-2 quickly be forced
to kill himself as a dubious form of res0 titution. Anderson's hands
were to money, however, as -1 fertilizer is to roses, and he and Jackson
were, together, a -2 winning combination.0011 "Yet no paradise continues
forever, and a besetting 0 characteristic, left to itself, will deepen,
widen, and grow more extreme. Jackson's honesty grew to such colossal
proportions that Anderson, for all his shrewdness, was occasionally
backed to the wall and forced into monetary 3 loss. Similarly,
Anderson's acquisitiveness burrowed to 4 such infernal depths that
Jackson, for all his morality, 3 found himself occasionally twisted into
questionable -2 practices.0012 "Naturally, as Anderson disliked losing
money, and Jackson abhorred losing character, a coolness grew be4 tween
the two. In such a situation the advantage clearly 3 lay on the side of
Anderson, who placed no reasonable 2 limits on his actions, whereas
Jackson felt himself bound 0 by a code of ethics.01-1 "Slyly, Anderson
worked and maneuvered until, even4 tually, poor honest Jackson found
himself forced to sell 0 out his end of the partnership under the most
disadvanta-1 geous possible conditions.0011 "Anderson's acquisitiveness,
we might say, had reached 3 a climax, for he acquired sole control of
the business. It 1 was his intention to retire now, leaving its everyday
run6 ning to employees, and concerning himself no further 4 than was
required to pocket its profits. Jackson, on the 2 other hand, was left
with nothing more than his honesty, 3 and while honesty is an admirable
characteristic, it has 0 small direct value in a hockshop.011 "It was at
this point, gentlemen, that I entered the pic2 ture. . . . Ah, Henry,
thank you."001 The glasses of brandy were being passed about.01-1 "You
did not know these people to begin with?" asked 0 Rubin, his sharp eyes
blinking.014 "Not at all," said Bartram, sniffing delicately at the 6
brandy and just touching it to his upper lip, "though I 1 think one of
you in this room did. It was some years ago.0016 "I first met Anderson
when he entered my office in a 3 white heat. 'I want you to find what
I've lost,' he said. I 0 have dealt with many cases of theft in my
career and so I said, naturally, 'Just what is it you have lost?' And he
an2 swered, 'Damn it, man, that's what I've just asked you to -1 find
out.'0012 "The story came out rather raggedly. Anderson and Jackson had
quarreled with surprising intensity. Jackson 7 was outraged, as only an
honest man can be when he -2 finds that his integrity is no shield
against the conniving of 5 others. He swore revenge, and Anderson
shrugged that -1 off with a laugh."0012 "Beware the wrath of a patient
man," quoted Avalon, with the air of precision research he brought to
even his 0 least portentous statements.012 "So I have heard," said
Bartram, "though I have never had occasion to test the maxim. Nor,
apparently, had 8 Anderson, for he had no fear of Jackson. As he ex1
plained, Jackson was so psychotically honest and so in3 sanely
law-abiding that there was no chance of his slip0 ping into wrongdoing.
Or so Anderson thought. It did not -1 even occur to him to ask Jackson
to return the office key; 1 something all the more curious since the
office was located in Anderson's house, in among the knickknackery.001-1
"Anderson recalled this omission a few days after the 5 quarrel, for,
returning from an early evening appoint2 ment, he found Jackson in his
house. Jackson carried his -1 old attache case, which he was just
closing as Anderson 3 entered; closing with startled haste, it seemed to
Ander-6 son.001 "Anderson frowned and said, inevitably, 'What are you -1
doing here?'001 " 'Returning some papers which were in my possession 5
and which now belong to you,' said Jackson, 'and re-1 turning the key to
the office.' With this remark, he handed 5 over the key, indicated
papers on the desk, and pushed 3 the combination lock on his battered
attache case with 1 fingers that Anderson could swear trembled a little.
Jack4 son looked about the room with what appeared to An-1 derson to be
a curious, almost a secretively satisfied, smile 1 and said, 'I will now
leave.' He proceeded to do so.0015 "It was not until Anderson heard the
motor of Jack0 son's car whirring into action and then retreating into
the -1 distance that he could rouse himself from a kind of stupor 6 that
had paralyzed him. He knew he had been robbed, 1 and the next day he
came to me."0013 Drake pursed his lips, twirled his half-empty brandy 0
glass, and said, "Why not to the police?"012 "There was a complication,"
said Bartram. "Anderson 0 did not know what had been taken. When the
certainty of theft dawned on him, he naturally rushed to the safe. Its 3
contents were secure. He ransacked his desk. Nothing -1 seemed to be
missing. He went from room to room. Ev1 erything seemed to be intact as
far as he could tell."0011 "Wasn't he certain?" asked Gonzalo.0012 "He
couldn't be. The house was inordinately crowded 5 with every variety of
object and he didn't remember all 1 his possessions. He told me, for
instance, that at one time 5 he collected antique watches. He had them
in a small -1 drawer in his study; six of them. All six were there, but
he 1 was nagged by the faint memory of seven. For the life of 5 him, he
could not remember definitely. In fact, it was 2 worse than that, for
one of the six present seemed strange 7 to him. Could it be that he had
had only six but that a 4 less valuable one had been substituted for a
more valu2 able one? Something of this sort repeated itself a dozen -1
times over in every hideaway and with every sort of odd-1 ment. So he
came to me-"001-1 "Wait a while," said Trumbull, bringing his hand down
4 hard on the table. "What made him so certain that Jack2 son had taken
anything at all?"0011 "Ah," said Bartram, "that is the fascinating part
of the story. The closing of the attache case, and Jackson's se3 cretive
smile as he looked about the room, served in 6 themselves to rouse
Anderson's suspicions, but as the 0 door closed behind him, Jackson
chuckled. It was not an 5 ordinary chuckle. . . . But I'll let Anderson
tell it in his 1 own words, as nearly as I remember them.0012 "
'Bartram,' he said, 'I have heard that chuckle innumerable times in my
life. I have chuckled that way myself a thousand times. It is a
characteristic chuckle, an unmis5 takable one, an unmaskable one. It is
the acquisitive -2 chuckle; it is the chuckle of a man who has just
obtained something he wants very much at the expense of someone 2 else.
If any man in all the world knows that chuckle and 0 can recognize it,
even behind a closed door, that man is 3 myself. I cannot be mistaken.
Jackson had taken some-1 thing of mine and was glorying in it!'001
"There was no arguing with the man on this point. He -2 virtually
slavered at the thought of having been victimized 4 and, indeed, I had
to believe him. I had to suppose that 1 for all Jackson's pathological
honesty, he had been lured, 9 by the once-in-a-lifetime snapping of
patience, into -1 theft. Helping lure him must have been his knowledge
of 4 Anderson. He must have known Anderson's intent hold 3 on even the
least valued of his belongings, and realized 0 that the hurt would
extend far deeper and far beyond the value of the object taken, however
great that value might have been."012 Rubin said, "Maybe it was the
attache case he took."0014 "No, no, that was Jackson's. He'd owned it
for years. 3 So there you have the problem. Anderson wanted me to -1
find out what had been taken, for until he could identify a 4 stolen
object and show that the object was, or had been, 0 in the possession of
Jackson, he could not prosecute-and he was most intent on prosecution.
My task, then, was to look through his house and tell him what was
missing."014 "How would that be possible, if he himself couldn't -1
tell?" growled Trumbull.0012 "I pointed that out to him," said Bartram,
"but he was 6 wild and unreasoning. He offered me a great deal of 1
money, win or lose; a very handsome fee, indeed, and he 2 put down a
sizable portion of it as a retainer. It was clear 0 he resented beyond
measure the deliberate insult to his 1 acquisitiveness. The thought that
an amateur non-acquis-8 itor like Jackson should dare beard him in this
most 1 sacred of his passions had driven him, on this one point, 4 mad,
and he was prepared to go to any expense to keep 1 the other's victory
from being final.0012 "I am myself quite human. I accepted the retainer
and 6 the fee. After all, I reasoned, I had my methods. I took 0 up the
question of insurance lists first. All were outdated, 7 but they served
to eliminate the furniture and all the -1 larger items as possible
victims of Jackson's thievery, for 2 everything on the lists was still
in the house."0013 Avalon interrupted. "They were eliminated anyway, 0
since the stolen object would have had to fit into the atta2 che
case."0011 "Provided that it was indeed the attache case that was 0 used
to transport the item out of the house," pointed out 5 Bartram patiendy.
"It might easily have been a decoy. Prior to Anderson's return, Jackson
could have had a 0 moving van at the door and taken out the grand piano
had he so chosen, and then snapped the attache case in Ander2 son's face
to mislead him.0018 "But never mind that. It wasn't likely. I took him
-1 around the house room by room, following a systematic 2 procedure of
considering the floor, walls, and ceiling, 0 studying all the shelves,
opening every door, considering 2 every piece of furniture, going
through every closet. Nor 0 did I neglect the attic and the basement.
Never before had 2 Anderson been forced to consider every item of his
vast 5 and amorphous collection in order that somewhere, 1 somehow, some
item would jog his memory of some companion item that was not 0
there.0011 "It was an enormous house, a heterogeneous one, an 5 endless
one. It took us days, and poor Anderson grew 0 more befuddled each
day.015 "I next tackled it from the other end. It was obvious 2 that
Jackson had deliberately taken something unnotice-able, perhaps small;
certainly something that Anderson 5 would not easily miss and therefore
not something to 8 which he was greatly attached. On the other hand, it
5 made sense to suppose that it was something Jackson 0 would want to
take away, and which he would find valu-3 able. Indeed, his deed would
give him most satisfaction if 3 Anderson, too, found it valuable-once he
realized what 1 it was that was gone. What, then, could it be?"0016 "A
small painting," said Gonzalo eagerly, "which -1 Jackson knew to be an
authentic Cezanne, but which An1 derson thought was junk."0014 "A stamp
from Anderson's collection," said Rubin, 2 "which Jackson noted had a
rare mistake in the engrav5 ing." He had once written a story which had
hinged on -1 this precise point.0011 "A book," said Trumbull, "which
contained some hid-2 den family secret with which, in due time, Jackson
could 1 blackmail Anderson."0011 "A photograph," said Avalon
dramatically, "that An2 derson had forgotten but which contained the
likeness of -1 an old sweetheart which, eventually, he would give a for1
tune to buy back."001-1 "I don't know what business they were in," said
Drake 7 thoughtfully, "but it might have been the kind where 1 some
unvalued gimcrack might actually be of great value 0 to a competitor and
drive Anderson to bankruptcy. I re1 member one case where a formula for
a hydrazo-inter0 mediate-"01 "Oddly enough," said Bartram, breaking in
firmly, "I 5 thought of each of these possibilities, and I went over 4
each with Anderson. It was clear that he had no taste in 2 art and such
pieces as he had were really junk, and no 4 mistake. He did not collect
stamps, and though he had 5 many books and could not tell for certain
whether one -1 was gone, he swore he had no hidden family secrets
anywhere that were worth the skipped beat of a blackmailer's 3 heart.
Nor had he ever had any old sweethearts, since in -1 his younger days he
had confined himself to professional 3 ladies whose photographs he did
not prize. As for his 2 business secrets, they were of the sort that
would interest 0 the government far more than any competitor, and
everything of that sort had been kept far from Jackson's honest 1 eyes
in the first place and were still in the safe (or long in 5 the fire) in
the second. I thought of other possibilities, 1 but, one by one, they
were knocked down.0011 "Of course, Jackson might betray himself. He
might blossom out into sudden wealth, and in ferreting out the 3 source
of the wealth, we might learn the identity of the -2 stolen object.0011
"Anderson suggested that himself and paid lavishly to 8 have a
twenty-four-hour watch put on Jackson. It was -2 useless. The man kept a
dull way of life and behaved pre-1 cisely as you would expect someone
minus his life savings 1 to behave. He lived parsimoniously, and,
eventually, took a menial job, where his honesty and his calm demeanor
-1 stood him in good stead.0011 "Finally, I had but one alternative
left-" 7 "Wait, wait," said Gonzalo, "let me guess, let me 0 guess." He
tossed off what was left of his brandy, signaled 2 Henry for another,
and said, "You asked Jackson!"6 "I was strongly tempted to," said
Bartram ruefully, 2 "but that would scarcely have been feasible. It
doesn't do 1 in my profession to even hint at an accusation without -1
evidence of any sort. Licenses are too fragile. And in any 3 case, he
would simply deny theft, if accused, and be put 2 on his guard against
any self-incrimination."0015 "Well, then . . . ," said Gonzalo blankly,
and petered -3 out.0012 The other four furrowed brows one and all, but
only -3 silence followed.0017 Bartram, having waited politely, said,
"You won't 0 guess, gentlemen, for you are not in the profession. You
k-2 now only what you read in romances and so you think gentlemen like
myself have unlimited numbers of alterna-3 tives and invariably solve
all cases. I, myself, being in the 1 profession, know otherwise.
Gentlemen, the one alterna0 tive I had left was to confess failure.011
"Anderson paid me, however, I'll give him that much -2 credit. By the
time I said my goodbyes to him, he had lost 6 some ten pounds. There was
a vacant look in his eyes 1 and, as he shook hands with me, they moved
round and 4 round the room he was in, still looking, still looking. He 0
muttered, 'I tell you I couldn't possibly mistake that 2 chuckle. He
took something from me. He took something from me.'001 "I saw him on two
or three occasions thereafter. He 1 never stopped looking; he never
found the missing object.0019 He went rather downhill. The events I have
described00 1 took place nearly five years ago, and last month, he
died."014 There was a short silence. Avalon said, "Without ever fin-2
ding the missing object?"001-1 "Without ever finding it."0014 Trumbull
said, with disapproval, "Are you coming to 0 us to help you with the
problem now?"01 "In a way, yes. The occasion is too good to miss. An-1
derson is dead and whatever is said within these walls will 0 go no
farther, we all agree, so that I may now ask what I 1 could not ask
before. . . . Henry, may I have a light?"001 Henry, who had been
listening with a kind of absent-minded deference, produced a book of
matches and lit 1 Bartram's cigarette.001-1 "Let me introduce you,
Henry, to those you so efficient0 ly serve. . . . Gentlemen, may I
introduce to you, Henry 2 Jackson."0014 There was a moment of clear
shock and Drake said, 2"The 0 Jackson."0011 "Exactly," said Bartram. "I
knew he was working here -1 and when I heard it was at this club that
you met for your monthly meetings, I had to beg, rather shamelessly, for
an 3 invitation. It was only here that I could find the gentle0 man with
the acquisitive chuckle, and do so under condi1 tions of both bonhomie
and discretion."0011 Henry smiled and bent his head.0014 Bartram said,
"There were times during the course of 7 the investigation when I could
not help but wonder, -1 Henry, whether Anderson might not have been
wrong and 2 whether there might possibly have been no theft at all. 1
Always, however, I returned to the matter of the acquisitive chuckle,
and I trusted Anderson's judgment."001 "You did right to do so," said
Jackson softly, "for I did 0 steal something from my one-time partner,
the gentleman 5 you have referred to as Anderson. I never regretted the
1 act for one moment."0011 "It was something of value, I presume."0011
"It was of the greatest value and no day passed without 0 my thinking of
the theft and rejoicing in the fact that the 2 wicked man no longer had
what I had taken away."0014 "And you deliberately roused his suspicions
in order 1 that you might experience the greater joy."0011 "Yes,
sir."0012 "And you did not fear being caught?"0011 "Not for one moment,
sir."0014 "By God," roared Avalon suddenly, his voice soaring 3 to
breakneck loudness. "I say it again. Beware the wrath 5 of a patient
man. I am a patient man, and I am tired of -1 this endless
cross-examination. Beware my wrath, Henry. 2 What was it you carried off
in your attache case?"0011 "Why, nothing, sir," said Henry. "It was
empty."0012 "Heaven help me! Where did you put whatever it was 0 you
took from him?"012 "I didn't have to put it anywhere, sir."0011 "Well,
then, what did you take?"001 "Only his peace of mind, sir," said Henry
gently.02360124 Afterword00236011 This story first appeared in the
January 1972 issue of -1Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine.00015 It taught
me an object lesson, too, in this matter of chains of logical deduction.
I've often thought that the 2 ease with which story detectives weave
their inexorable -1 webs of logic was too pat; that in real life there
would al-2 ways be large holes.001 Sometimes, the holes appear even in
the stories. After 3 "The Acquisitive Chuckle" had appeared, a reader
wrote 2 to tell me that I had neglected to specify that Jackson's 4
attache case was really his own, and that it might well 3 have been the
attache case that he had stolen. That had 2 never occurred to me and so,
of course, it didn't occur to 0 any of the characters in the story.015
For the book, therefore, I added a couple of lines to 7 take care of
that possibility. (That shows you, by the 0 way, that readers aren't
merely replete with troublesome 3 questions, as the Introduction would
seem to imply. 0 Sometimes they are very useful, and I appreciate those
occasions greatly.)01303540191201Ph as in Phony003540191 It was a shame
that this had to be so, for the dinner was unusually good, even allowing
for the loving care with which the Milano Restaurant took care of its
special group every month. And if the veal cordon bleu 0 needed anything
to add the final bit of luster, it was Henry's meticulous service, which
had plates on the table where no plate had been before, yet without any
person present able to catch it en route.0354051 Trumbull exercised
host's privilege and had brought a guest for the grilling. The guest was
tall, almost as tall as Geoffrey Avalon, the Black Widowers'
patent-attorney member. He was lean, almost as lean as Geoffrey Avalon.
He was clean-shaven, though, and lacked the solemnity of Avalon. Indeed,
his face was round and his cheeks plump, in a manner so out of keeping
with the rest of his body that one might have thought him the product of
a head transplant. He was Arnold Stacey, by name.035403540535405354010
"It is a rule of the Black Widowers," said Trumbull impatiently, "that
all members are doctors by virtue of membership. A doctor for any other
reason is-"01354035401 Mario Gonzalo was mounting the stairs just then,
bringing with him a faint whiff of turpentine as though he had come
straight from his artist's studio. (Trumbull maintained you couldn't
draw that conclusion; that Gonzalo placed a drop of turpentine behind
each ear before any social engagement.)01 Gonzalo was in time to catch
Emmanuel Rubin's statement and said, before he had quite reached the top
step, "What honorary doctorates did you ever receive, Manny? Dis0
honorary doctorates, I'm ready to believe."010 Rubin's face froze as it
usually did when he was attacked without warning, but that was merely
the short pause necessary to gather his forces. He said, "I can list
them for you. In 1938, when I was only fifteen, it so happens I was a
revivalist preacher and I received a D.D. from-"011"No, 0 for God's
sake," said Trumbull, "don't give us the list. We accept it all."01
"You're fighting out of your weight, Mario," said Avalon with wooden
amiability. "You know Rubin can never be spotted in an inconsistency
when he starts talking about his early life."03540535403540535401 Avalon
said, "Doctor Doctor Arnold Stacey . . . Doctor Doctor James Drake."01
"Greetings," said Drake, holding up his glass in salute. 'What's the
nature of the lesser doctorate, Doctor
Stacey?"03540143540143540354053540143540535405"That's what I thought.
Chopped liver. Damn it, Henry, I ask you, as a pathologically honest
man, is this fit to eat?"0354051 Avalon pounded the table. "Point of
order! I object to Manny's use of the adjectival phrase 'pathologically
honest.' Violation of confidence!"035405835403540354035401 "Would you 0
eat it, Henry?" asked Rubin.03540193540103540141 Drake started slightly
and said, "Nothing. What's bothering you?"003540101 The conversation
grew general after that, centering chiefly on Rubin's aggrieved
contention that honesty lacked survival value and that all the forces of
natural selection combined to eliminate it as a human trait. He did well
defending his thesis till Gonzalo asked him if he attributed his own
success as a writer ("such as it is," said Gonzalo) to plagiarism. When
Rubin met the point head on and tried to prove, by close reasoning, that
plagiarism was fundamentally different from other forms of dishonesty
and might be treated independently, he was hooted
down.03540143540143540193540143540433540535401 "Doctor Doctor Stacey,"
began Drake heavily, "how do you justify your existence?"01 "Less and
less as time goes on," said Stacey, unperturbed.0354035401 "I don't mind
answering," said Stacey. "Since the universities seem to be in deeper
trouble each year, and as I do nothing about it, my own function as a
university appendage seems continually less defensible, that's all."01
Drake ignored that. He said, "You teach at the school where I earned my
master's degree. Have you ever heard of
me?"0354010354035405354035403540535401 Drake said, "But you have heard
of David St. George?"01 "Professor St. George? Certainly. He died the
same year I joined the faculty. I can't say I know him, but I've
certainly heard of him."01 Trumbull said, "Hell and damnation, Jim. What
kind of questions are these? Is this old-grad week?"010 Drake, who had
drifted off into thought, scrambled out of it and said, "Wait, Tom. I'm
getting at something, and I don't want to ask questions. I want to tell
a story first. My God, this has been bothering me for years and I never
thought of putting it up to all of you till now that our
guest-"01354035401 "Chair decides the precedents," said Trumbull at
once. "Go ahead, Drake. Only, for God's sake, don't take all night."01
"It's simple enough," said Drake, "and it's about Lance Faron, which is
his real name, and I'm going to slander him, so you'll have to
understand, Arnold, that everything said within these walls is strictly
confidential."035405354010 Drake said, "The thing about Lance is that I
don't think he ever intended to be a chemist. His family was rich
enough-well, I'll tell you. When he was doing graduate work, he had his
lab outfitted with a cork floor at his own
expense."0135405354035405354035401010 "Were the rest of you jealous of
him?" asked Rubin. "Because that kind of guy-"013540510 "We even helped
him. Gus Blue tutored him in physical organic-for a fee. Of course, he
wasn't always scrupulous. There was one preparation he was supposed to
have synthesized in lab, and we knew that he bought a sample at a
chemical supply house and turned it in as his own. At least, we were
pretty sure he did, but it didn't bother us."013540535401935401 Drake
lifted his eyebrows, then dropped them again. "I wouldn't guarantee any
of us if we were really pushed. The point is, we weren't. We all had a
fighting chance to get through without the risk of cheating, and none of
us did. As far as I know. Certainly, I didn't.01 "But then there came a
time when Lance made up his mind to go on for his Ph.D. It was at a
smoker. The war jobs were just beginning to open up and there were a few
recruiters on campus. It meant money and complete security from the
draft, but Ph.D.'s meant a lot to us and there was some question as to
whether we'd come back to school once we got away from class for any
reason.01 "Someone (not I) said he wished he were in Lance's shoes.
Lance had no choice to make. He would take the job.01 " 'I don't know,'
said Lance, maybe just to be contrary. 'I think I'll stay right here and
go on for the Ph.D.'01 "He may have been joking. I'm sure he was joking.
Anyway, we all thought he was, and we laughed. But we were all a little
high and it became one of those laughs without reason, you know. If one
of us started to die down, he would catch someone else's eyes and start
off again. It wasn't that funny. It wasn't funny at all. But we laughed
till we were half suffocated. And Lance turned red, and then white.01 "I
remember I tried to say, 'Lance, we're not laughing at you,' but I
couldn't. I was choking and sputtering. And Lance walked out on
us.0354035401 "He said, 'Why not? I've talked to the committee. I told
them I'd take chemical kinetics under St. George, and that I'd make an A
in that. I said I'd let them see what I could do.'01 "That made less
than no sense to me. That was funnier than the remark we laughed at.
You'd have to know St. George. You ought to know what I mean, Arnold."01
Stacey nodded, "He gave a stiff course in kinetics. One or two of the
brightest would get an A minus; B's and C's
otherwise."03540535401035405354035402935401 "I never heard of anyone
getting it in recent times," said Stacey.035403540354035403540535401 "I
suppose so."035401 Drake looked about the table, first at one and then
at another. Then he brought his fist down so that the coffee-cups jumped
and clattered. "Because he cheated, 00 damn his hide. That was not a
legitimate final exam and as long as he has his Ph.D., mine is cheapened
by that much- and yours, too," he said to Stacey.0135401 "What?" said
Drake, a little wildly.035403540241 Drake snorted.03540354035401
Trumbull said heavily, "All right, say he did. He got his Ph.D. but he
didn't do so well. From what you say, he's just off in a corner
somewhere, poking along. You know damn well, Jim, that lots of guys get
through to all kinds of professional positions, even without cheating,
who have all their brains in their elbows, and so what. Why get mad at
one particular guy, cheating or not? You know why I think you're off
your rocker on the subject, Jim? What gripes you is that you don't know
how he did it. If you could figure it out, why you'd forget the whole
thing."01 Henry interrupted, "More brandy for anyone, gentlemen?"01 Five
delicate little glasses were raised in air. Avalon, who measured out his
allowance with an eye dropper, kept his down.01 Drake said, "Well, then,
Tom, you tell me. How did he do it? You're the code expert."010 "But
there's no code involved. I don't know. Maybe he -he-managed to get
someone else to do the test for him and handed in someone else's
paper."011 "In someone else's handwriting?" said Drake scornfully.
"Besides, I thought of it. We all thought of it. You don't suppose I was
the only one who thought Lance0 10 cheated, do you? We all did. When
that 96 went up on that bulletin board, after we got our breath back-and
that took a while-we demanded to see his paper. He handed it over
without trouble and we all went over it. It was a near-perfect job, but
it was in his handwriting and with his turns of phrase. I wasn't
impressed by the few errors he made. I thought at the time he threw them
in just in order not to have a perfect paper."01354051 "Impossible.
There was no one in the class but the students and St. George's
assistant. The assistant opened the sealed test papers just before the
test started. No one could have written a paper for Lance and another
for himself, even if you could imagine no one else seeing it done.
Besides, there wasn't anyone in the class capable of turning out a
96-level paper."035401 "No, he couldn't," said Drake flatly. "You're not
suggesting anything we didn't think of then, take my word for it. The
university had had a cheating scandal ten years before or so and the
whole procedure had been tightened up. St. George followed standard
procedure. He worked out the questions and turned it in to his secretary
the day before the test. She mimeographed the necessary number of copies
in St. George's presence. He proofread them, then destroyed the
mimeograph and the original. The question papers were packaged and
sealed and placed in the school safe. The safe was opened just before
the test and the papers handed to St. George's assistant. There was no
chance of Lance seeing the questions."010 "Maybe not just then," said
Avalon. "But even if the professor had the questions mimeographed the
day before the test, how long might he have had the questions in his
possession? He might have used a set of questions used on a
previous-"0135402935403540510 "He's got crud there," said Drake,
"because that's not the way St. George worked it. Every question in that
final exam turned on some particular point that some particular student
goofed up on in class. One of them, and the most subtle, covered a point
that I had missed in the last week of lectures. I pointed out what I
thought was a mistake in a derivation, and St. George-well, never mind.
The point is that the tests had to be prepared after the last
lectures."011 Arnold Stacey broke in, "Did St. George always 0 do that?
If he did, he would have been handing a hell of a lot to the kids."01
"You mean the students would have been waiting for questions covering
errors made in the discussion periods?"01 "More than that. The students
would have deliberately pulled boners on those parts of the subject they
actually knew well in order to lure St. George into placing twenty
points' worth on it."035401 "Previous classes would have passed on the
news, wouldn't they? At least if classes in the forties were anything
like classes now."01 "They would have," admitted Drake, "and they
didn't. He did it that way that year, anyway."01 "Say, Jim," said
Gonzalo, "how did Lance do in the dicsussion periods?"03540535401 Drake
said grimly, "You don't know the secretary. Besides, he couldn't have.
He couldn't have suborned the secretary, or broken into the safe, or
pulled any trick at all. From the nature of the questions, we could tell
the exam had been constructed in the last week before it had been taken,
and during that last week he couldn't have done a thing."0354035401 "You
mean you never let him out of your sight?" demanded Avalon. "Did you
watch at night in shifts? Did you follow him into the John?"01 "Damn
near. He was Burroughs' roommate and Burroughs was a light sleeper and
swore he knew every time Lance turned over."01 "Burroughs might have
been dragged one night," said Rubin.01 "He might have, but he didn't
think so, and no one else thought so. Lance just didn't act suspicious
in any way; he didn't even act annoyed at being
watched."03540354035403540354035401 Rubin said sardonically, "It seems
to me, Jim, that you've painted yourself into a corner. Your man
couldn't possibly have cheated."01 "That's the whole point," cried
Drake. "He must 0 have cheated and he did it so cleverly no one could
catch him. No one could even figure out how. Tom's right. That's 0 what
gripes me."01 And then Henry coughed and said, "If I may offer a word,
gentlemen?"01 Every face went up as though some invisible puppeteer had
pulled the strings.0354035401 "Why, Henry, you hurt me cruelly," said
Avalon with a smile, but his dark eyebrows curled down over his eyes.01
"I mean no disrespect, gentlemen, but Mr. Rubin maintained that
dishonesty has value. Mr. Trumbull thinks that Dr. Drake is only annoyed
because the cheating was clever enough to escape detection and not
because it existed at all, and perhaps all of you agree to that."01
Gonzalo said, "I think you're hinting, Henry, that you're so honest that
you're more sensitive to dishonesty than we are and can understand it
better."035403540533540354053540535401 Henry said, "You find excuses,
sir. In any situation in which a professor asks questions and a student
answers them, one always feels somehow that if there is dishonesty, it
is always the student's dishonesty. Why? 0 What if it were the professor
who were dishonest?"03540535401 "For what? To hand in a fake mark? We
saw Lance's answer paper, and it was legitimate. To let Lance see the
questions before having them mimeographed? It wouldn't have done Lance
any good."0354051 Again the invisible puppeteer worked and there was a
chorus of "What?"s in various degrees of intonation.0354096354035401
"Why not?" said Gonzalo enthusiastically. "Good God, it makes sense."01
Drake said slowly, "I've got to admit that's a possibility that never
occurred to any of us. ... But, of course, we'll never
know."035405354035401935402435401 Trumbull said, "Then that's that. Jim,
after thirty years, you can forget the whole thing."010
"Except-except"-a half smile came over Drake's face and then he broke
into a laugh-"I 1 am 0 dishonest because I can't help thinking that if
Lance had the questions all along, the bastard might have passed on a
hint or two to the rest of us."01 "After you had all laughed at him,
sir?" asked Henry quietly, as he began to clear the table.03540331124
Afterword00354024035401 Here in the book, however, I hope Mr. Treat
won't mind if I go back to "Ph as in Phony," since that seems to me to
be perfect. I promise I won't use that type of title again.01 This
story, incidentally, betrayed me into a bit of vanity of a type unusual
for me. (Certain other types are usual.) A Professor Porter of the
University of Oregon wrote to point out certain infelicities in the
story in connection with qualifying for research toward the doctorate.
He signed it with a "Ph.D." after his signature to indicate that he was
qualified to discuss the matter.01 And he was, for he was entirely right
and I have adjusted the version of the story as presented here to
meethis objections. However, in answering the letter, I was so anxious
not to have him think I was myself unqualified that I placed a "Ph.D."
after my signature, too. The initials were legitimate, for I obtained it
in chemistry at Columbia in 1948, but I think it's the only time I used
it in anything but official scholarly communications.01300243360130
303360771Truth to Tell00336070133601 "Hello, Roger," said Geoffrey
Avalon, smiling from his stiff height. "Pleased to see you."010 Halsted
shucked his coat. "Damned cold outside. Henry, bring-"011 But Henry, the
only waiter the Black Widowers ever had or ever would have, had the
drink waiting. "I'm glad to see you again, sir."01 Halsted took it with
a nod of thanks. "Twice running something came up. . . . Say, you know
what I've decided to do?"01 "Give up mathematics and make an honest
living?" asked Rubin.01 Halsted sighed. "Teaching math at a junior high
school is about as honest a living as one can find. That's why it pays
so little."03360193360143360193360336033603360106133601They argued a
lot,001Then Achilles grew hot,001And went stamping away in a
pique."003360230336033601 Mario Gonzalo came racing up the stairs. He
was host for that session and he said, "Anyone else here?"0336033601
Henry lifted his eyebrows as he produced Mario's drink.01 "Don't tell me
you're bringing George Washington!" said
Halsted.03360193360336053360533601 "Henry?" Halsted looked over his
shoulder in mild surprise. "Are they getting you involved in our
idiocies?"01 "I assure you, Mr. Halsted, I tried not to be," said
Henry.0336053360336010336051 "John Sand," said Mario, introducing him
all round in a pageant that was interrupted by Thomas Trumbull's033601
Rubin said, "Tom, you can come early if you relax and stop trying so
hard to be late."01 "The later I come," said Trumbull, "the less I have
to hear of your Goddamn stupid remarks. Ever think of that?" Then he was
introduced, too, and all sat down.01 Since the menu for that meeting had
been so incautiously devised as to begin with artichokes, Rubin had
launched into a dissertation on the preparation of the only proper sauce
for it. Then, when Trumbull had said disgustedly that the only proper
preparation for artichokes involved a large garbage can, Rubin said,
"Sure, if 00 you don't have the right sauce-"011 Sand ate uneasily and
left at least a third of an excellent steak untouched. Halsted, who had
a tendency to plumpness, eyed the remains enviously. His own plate was
the first one cleaned. Only a scraped bone and some fat were
left.03360336033605336010 "Good, because I would be anyway. It's
my-fetish. You're lying, Mr. Halsted. Of course you want the rest of my
steak, and you'd eat it, too, if you thought no one would notice. That's
perfectly obvious. Social convention requires you to lie, however. You
don't want to seem greedy and you don't want to seem to ignore the
elements of hygiene by eating something contaminated by the saliva of a
stranger."01336033601 "And I was hungry for more steak?"01 "Yes."01
"Well, I might not want to eat yours for hygienic
rea-03360103360533601033601 Henry was bringing the baba au rhum and
pouring the coffee delicately, and Avalon said, "Let's get to our
honored
guest."03360143360103360533603360103360143360143360336033603360336033601
Sand paused. His blue eyes flicked from face to face, then he said,
"Gentlemen, I am telling the truth. I did not take the cash or the
bonds. That is only my unsupported word, but anyone who knows me will
tell you that I can be relied on."03360"Lots of people do.""And
lose."03360"But don't you risk losing your job?" "My advantage is, sir,
that I am employed by my uncle, who is aware of my weakness, but who
also knows I don't lie. He knew I had the means and opportunity, and he
knew I had debts. He also knew I had recently paid off my gambling
debts. I told him so. The circumstantial evidence looked bad. But then
he asked me directly whether I was responsible for the loss and I told
him exactly what I told you: I did not take the cash or the bonds. Since
he knows me well, he believes me."0336033607733603360533601 "The bet
wasn't that large, and I had other sources, but it could be argued so,
yes."01 Trumbull broke in, "But if you still have your job, as I suppose
you do, and if your uncle isn't prosecuting you, as I assume he isn't. .
. Has he gone to the police at all?"01 "No, he can absorb the loss and
he feels the police will only try to pin it on me. He knows that what I
have told him is true."0336033601 Rubin was frowning. "So you came here,
Mr. Sand, because Gonzalo said we solved mysteries. You want us to tell
you who really took the stuff."0336038336010 Sand shook his head.
"Enough to risk the possible consequences of being caught? I don't know.
One of them might be in debt, or one might be undergoing blackmail, or
one might be greedy, or just have the opportunity and act on impulse. If
I were a detective I could go about asking questions, or I could track
down documents, or whatever it is they do. As it is-"011 "Of course,"
said Avalon, "we can't do that either. . . . Now you had both means and
opportunity, but did anyone else?"033603360241 "Aha," said Mario
Gonzalo, "there's our man right0 1 there."033603360336053360341 "May I
speak, sir?" Henry spoke so quickly, and at a sound level so much higher
than his usual murmur, that everyone turned to face
him.03360143360383360343360143360343360143360383360243360336014336051
"That may be so," said Henry, "but I tell
lies."0336019336012033603360336033601 "Mr. Sand said that all lies arise
out of a desire for self-protection or out of respect for social
convention. But we cannot always ignore self-protection and social
convention. If we cannot lie, we must make the truth lie0 1 for
us."033601 Gonzalo said, "You're not making sense, Henry."01 "I think I
am Mr Gonzalo. Few people listen to exact0 1 words, and many a literal
truth tells a lie by implication. Who should know that better than a
person who carefully always tells the literal truth?"03360101 "I would
like to ask you a question, Mr. Sand. If the club is willing, of
course."01 "I don't care if they are or not," said Sand, glowering at
Henry. "If you take that tone, I might not choose to
answer."03360143360336053360243360293360383360403124
Afterword0033602403360243360336033602360103033602 4013360771Go, Little
Book!033607013360103360533601033605336010 At the other end of the table,
James Drake said to Roger Halsted, "A, B-" and paused, lengthily.011
"What?" said Halsted, his high, white forehead flushing and wrinkling as
his eyebrows moved upward.01 "Long time, no C," said Drake, coughing at
his own cigarette smoke, which he frequently
did.033607233603360336033601 "I've written one for the second. Would you
lake to03360341 hear it?"033603360101833601First Thersites
complains,001But Odysseus restrains,001And we next have the Cat'log of
Ships."0033602113360336033603360336033603360336033601 Like most guests,
he found it difficult to hop onto the merry-go-round of talk, and he
finally plunged in the direction of the one man at the table he
knew.0336033601 Avalon, who had been wielding his knife and fork in
workmanlike fashion over the stuffed veal, paused to say, "Collector's
mania is something that seizes almost every gentleman of leisure It has
many delights; the excitement of the search, the ecstasy of the
acquisition, the joy of later contemplation. You can do it with
anything. I collect stamps myself."033601 Gonzalo said, "A friend of
mind collects his own books. So far, he has published a hundred and
eighteen and carefully gets copies of every edition, American and
foreign, hard-cover and paperback, book-club and condensed. He's got a
whole roomful of them and says he is the only person in the world with a
complete collection of his works and that it will be worth a tremendous
sum someday "033601 "After he's dead," said Drake
briefly.03360243360336033603410 for-"013360336033601 "That could be
interesting," said Halsted agreeably,033602910 "if-"013360336033601 "Did
he have grayish sideburns, with a little red in it?"03360191 asked
Trumbull.033601 "But you're going to," said Rubin. "Is that it?" "No,
I'm not, damn it," said Trumbull hotly. "I'm asking your permission. I
would like to have our guest tell us all about his lunch yesterday with
this matchbook collector."01 Rubin said, "You mean instead of his being
put on the grill? We never put anyone on the grill any more!" "This
could be important."033601"Zabaglione, 0 sir, to go with the Italian
motif of tonight's meal."03360336010 Klein looked about the table and
said with a small laugh, "I'm willing to do it, but I don't know that
it's interesting-"01336033601 "Jane insisted on eating there one time
because of the name," said Rubin. "Not so hot."01 Trumbull said, "I'll
strangle you, Manny. What's all this talk about your wife today? If you
miss her, go home."01 "You're the only one I know, Tom, who would make
any man miss any wife."033603360336053360336033605336012033601 Halsted
said reflectively, "That's an interesting point, Mr. Klein. At least you
know you don't remember the exact words. In all these first-person
narratives, the fellow telling the story always remembers every word
everyone has said, and in the right order. It never carries conviction
with me."0336033604310 will be-"0133601 "I wrote a first-person
narrative once," said Rubin,03360241 "in which the narrator dies."033601
"That happens in the western song, 'El Paso,' too,"03360431 said
Gonzalo.0336010 "In 'The Murder of Roger'-" began Avalon.01336033601
Except that he made it sound so interesting it captured me, as I
said."03360533605336053360103360336010336051 "He's got skinny matchbooks
that hold two matches apiece; some as long as your arm that hold a
hundred and fifty. He's got matches shaped like beer bottles, others
shaped like baseball bats or bowling pins. He's got blank matchbooks
with nothing on the cover; he's got match-books with musical scores on
them. Damn it, he's got a whole folder of pornographic
matchbooks."03360336053360823360336033603360336033605310 up-"0133601
"Look," said Drake flatly. "Either tell us or don't tell03360531
us."033601 Trumbull rubbed his eyes angrily. He said, "There's
an03360341 information leak."033601 "What kind? Where?" said
Gonzalo.0336033601 "All right," said Rubin. "And who's involved? This
guy03360431 Ottiwell?"033601923360336033603360533601 "It's the
matchbooks. What else? It's got to be. All our evidence points to
Ottiwell as the leak and he's a crazy guy who collects matchbooks.
There's got to be a connection."010 "You mean he started collecting
matchbooks so he could-"011 "No, he's been collecting them all his life.
There's no doubt about it. That collection he has right now took thirty
years a-building. But once he had his collection, when he was somehow
recruited into the business of transmitting information, he naturally
worked out a scheme that involved his
matchbooks."03360336033603360336053360241 "Not if there's a plausible
reason to mail matchbooks."01 "Like what?"03360336033601 "Sure he
does."01 "And you never managed to pick up anything he put03360291 into
the mail?"033601 "And by so doing," said Rubin, looking off into the
distance, "interfering with the United States mails. That's an easy
thing to do when it's only a matter of the New York Mets' baseball
signals."0336033603360381 Brotherism?"033601 "All right," said Drake,
"so you studied the match-books this Ottiwell puts in the mail. What did
you get?"01 "Nothing," grunted Trumbull. "There was nothing we could
make out of it. We studied those damned advertising items on each cover
and came up with nothing."033606733601933601033601433601433601 "He
invited me. I cultivated his friendship."033601433601933601 "Right,"
said Avalon.0336014336053336033601 "Plenty," said Trumbull indignantly.
"What do you think is needed in these cases? An encyclopedia? Whoever is
looking for information, you simp, has it almost all to begin with.
There's just some key point missing and that's what's needed.033601 "You
mean this guy, Ottiwell, is putting across information like that?" 0
demanded Gonzalo, in awe.01"No! 0 I told you he wasn't," said Trumbull,
annoyed. "He isn't important at all in that way. Do you think I would be
talking to all of you about it if he were? It's just that the modus
operandi 0 could be used for that as well as for anything else, and
that's why we have to break it. Besides, there's my reputation. I say
he's using the match-books and I can't show how. You think I like
that?"03360336010 Klein interrupted. "Imagine starting all this by
mentioning yesterday's lunch. Do you have, maybe, a list of matchbooks
he sent off? If you have a photostat, we could all look at it-"0110 "And
work out the code that I couldn't? Right?" said Trumbull. "You know ever
since Conan Doyle pitted Sherlock Holmes against the Scotland Yard
bunglers, there seems to be a notion going around that the professional
can't do anything. I assure you, if I can't do it-"01336033601 But a
look of deep thought came over Trumbull's face. "Henry," he said. "I
forgot about Henry. You're right, Jeff. He's the smartest man here,
which would ordinarily be a compliment, if you weren't all a pack of
prize imbeciles.01 "Henry," he said, "you're the honest man. You can see
the dishonesty of the world without having it blurred by your own
larcenous yearnings. Do you agree with me? Do you think this Ottiwell,
if he were going to engage in this kind of work, would do so only by
using his matchbooks in a way that would make them uniquely useful, or
not?"01 "As a matter of fact, Mr. Trumbull," said Henry, collecting the
dishes that remained, "I do. I agree with you."01 Trumbull smiled. "Here
we have the word of a man who knows what he's talking
about."03360336033603360483360336033601 "It wouldn't be a grilling,"
objected Henry softly. "Mr.03360291 Klein?"0336010 "It's just this, Mr.
Klein. When you began to tell, rather briefly, the story of your lunch
yesterday, you said something like-and I can't repeat the exact words
either -you thought he was crazy, but he made everything sound so
interesting that by the time he was through, you decided to start a
collection of matchbooks of your own."011 "That's right," said Klein,
nodding. "Sort of silly, I suppose. I certainly wouldn't do anything at
all like his0336033605336033601 "From our own."033601 "Yes," said Klein,
suddenly defensive. "Nothing wrong with that, is there? They're there
for the diners, aren't they?"033605336033603360533601 "No. But I'm
wearing the same coat."033603360533603360336033601033605333601 "If you
please, Mr. Gonzalo," said Henry. "I don't think anyone ought to touch
it yet. . . . Mr. Klein, this is the matchbook that was at your table,
the one you used to light a cigarette and which Mr. Ottiwell then used
to demonstrate some points about the place where the friction strip is
located and so on?"033601433601 "And he put it down and you picked it
up?"0336051 "Yes."03360336033601 "But, in any case, you tore off one
match to light your0336051 cigarette?"033601 "Oh,
yes."033603360336033601 "But you did pick it up from your table, and you
did think it was the matchbook you had used? You didn't pick it up from
another table altogether?"0336033601 "All right. If you gentlemen would
care to look at it03360336051 "I thought such a thing was possible as
soon as you said he was passing information, Mr. Trumbull. I agreed with
you, Mr. Trumbull, that Mr. Ottiwell would make use of matchbooks. The
psychology seemed sound to me. But I also agreed with Mr. Avalon that
indirection might be used. It's just that Mr. Avalon did not quite see
the possible subtlety of the indirection."033603360103360336051 Klein
looked alarmed. "No! 00 At least-at least-I don't know. I didn't notice
anyone."0133601"No! 0 None that I know of."0336051 Trumbull said, "Don't
worry, Klein. I'll arrange to have an eye kept on you for a
while."033601033603433601033601 "But how would it work?" said Trumbull,
ignoring Halsted's whispered verse. He turned the matchbook from side to
side between his fingers. "It's one match-book, just like all the rest.
It says 'Cock and Bull' on it, plus an address and a phone number. Where
would there be any information on this one as opposed to
others?"033603360336010336033605336024336014336053360103360533602433603833601933601
Henry said, "I may be quite wrong, sir."0336014336051 "Hey," shouted
Rubin, "don't you go taking Henry0 1 away from us."033601 "No fear, Mr.
Rubin," said Henry softly, "I find it much more exciting
here."03360326124 Afterword00336024033603360436038By the way, when I
first wrote the story I calculated out the value of 28 30 0 (that is, 30
two's mukiplied together) in my head out of sheer vainglory. Naturally,
I got an answer that was off a little, and serves me right. A young lady
named Mildred L. Stover wrote me a letter in which the value was
carefully calculated out, multiplication by multiplication, and I
corrected my mistake for the book. If you are interested, 27 30400 =
1,073,741,824. Thank you, -4 Miss Stover.00133602360103033601
503360771EarlySundayMorning003360706336010336014336010336053360143360533601933607233601
Trumbull said, "Damn it to hell, Roger, are you going to inflict one of
those on us at every meeting?"03360141 "Yes," said Halsted thoughtfully.
"I was planning just that. It keeps me working at it. Besides, you have
to have some item of intellectual worth at the dinner. . . . Say, Henry,
don't forget that if it's steak tonight, I want mine0 1 rare."0336051
"Trout tonight, Mr. Halsted," said Henry, refilling the0 1 water
glasses.033601 "Good," said Halsted. "Now here it
is:0336017833601Menelaus did well in001The duel over Helen,001But was
foiled by divine Aphrodite."003360245336033603360191 "Didn't you ever
read the Iliad, 0 Mario?" asked James0 1 Drake.03360141 "Listen," said
Gonzalo, "I'm an artist. I have to save0 1 my eyes."03360336051 "All
right, by Henry. But what kind of crimes? Rotten crimes. The first time
I wasn't here, but I gather the crime was a robbery, and not much of one
either, from what I understand. The second time, it was worse. It was a
case of cheating on an examination, for heaven's
sake."0336033603360533603360336033603360103360533603360103360533605333601
"Can you present one?" said Halsted hopefully. "You're with the
government, working on codes or whatever. You must have been involved
with murder, and you don't have to name names. You know that nothing
gets repeated outside these walls."033601 "No," said Halsted
thoughtfully, "I don't think I can recall being involved in a single
murder."01 "You don't think? You mean there's a doubt in your mind?"
asked
Avalon.03360336033603360336033603360143360103360533605336033601033603360533605336051
Halsted said, after a painful pause, "Did they ever get the ones who did
it?"01 Gonzalo's eyes lifted and stared into Halsted's without any
attempt at masking the contempt they held. "Do you think they even
looked? That sort of thing goes on all day long. Nobody can do anything.
Nobody even cares. And if they got them, so what? Would it bring back
Marge?"03360343360336033601 "He wasn't an artist?" Avalon was carrying
the burden of the questioning and the others seemed willing to leave it
to him.010 "No. He wasn't much of anything when they married, just a
drifter, but afterward he became exactly what she wanted. She was what
he needed to get a little push into him. They needed each other. She had
something to care for-"013360533603360336033601 "In which case they
would probably have run off
and033605336043336058336048336019336010336033603833601 "You mean it
happened on a Sunday?" asked Rubin.03360191 "Nuts," said Drake,
apparently still brooding over his difficulties in the morning. "You're
an artist and make your own hours. Why do you have to get up in the
morning?"0336019336019336014336053360863360583360433360336029336034336010"Yes.
Eight o'clock of a Sunday morning. Who would make a call at that time to
anyone unless they knew the jerk always got up at eight. If I had been
asleep and had been awakened, and growled into the mouthpiece, the whole
thing would have been different." "Who was it?" asked Drake.033603433601
"Anyway, if I'd only said no. If I'd only told him I'd had a bad night
and I needed my sleep and I didn't want company, he'd have gone back to
his apartment. He had no place else to go. And then it all wouldn't have
happened. But no, big-hearted Mario was so proud of being an early riser
that he said, 'Come on over and I'll fix you coffee and eggs,' because I
knew Marge wasn't one for early Sunday breakfasts, and I knew Alex
hadn't eaten.01 "So he was over in ten minutes and by eight-thirty I had
the scrambled eggs and bacon in front of him, and Marge was alone in the
apartment, waiting for murderers."033601 Gonzalo said, "I don't think
so. I assumed he didn't. I figure what happened was he stamped out in a
fit of rage without even knowing where he was going himself. Then he
thought of me. Even if he knew he was going to visit me, he might not
have told her. He would figure: Let her worry."01 "All right," said
Trumbull, "and then when the junkies came to the door and maybe tried
the lock, she figured it was Alex coming back and she opened the door to
them. I'll bet the lock wasn't broken."0336033601 "Listen," said Rubin,
"they'll do it any time. The craving for drugs knows no season."01 "What
was the fight about?" asked Avalon suddenly. "I mean, between Alex and
Marge?"01 "Oh, I don't know. A little thing. Alex had done something at
work that must have looked bad and that was one thing that Marge
couldn't stand. I don't even know what it was, but whatever it was, it
must have been a blow at her pride in him and she was
sore.03360583360583360293360293360533601433601 "It must have sounded
phony as hell," said Rubin.03360336033601 "That settled it as far as the
police were concerned. In that neighborhood, if it isn't the spouse,
it's some petty thief, probably an addict. Alex and I went out and he
got drunk and I stayed with him a couple of days because he was in no
condition to be left alone and that's all there is to the
story."03360336010 There was silence for a time, and then Halsted said,
"Do you mind, Mario, if we speculate about it, just- just-"011 "Just for
fun?" said Mario. "Sure, go ahead, have fun. If you have questions, I'll
answer as best I can but as far as the murder is concerned, there's
nothing to say."01 "You see," said Halsted awkwardly, "no one saw 0
anybody. It's only an assumption that some nameless addicts came in and
killed her. Someone might have killed her with a better reason, knowing
that it would be blamed on addicts and he'd be safe. Or she,
maybe."03360336033607233604833603433601033602433604333604333601933603433603833603433601433601
"Hell, if there were anything that serious, I'd know about it. Marge
never kept things like that quiet."01 Drake said, "Could it be suicide?
After all, her husband had just walked out on her. Maybe he said he was
never coming back and she was in despair. In a fit of irrational
depression, she killed herself."01 "It was a knife from the kitchen,"
said Gonzalo. "There's that. But Marge isn't the suicidal type. She
might kill someone eke, but not herself. Besides, why would there be
that struggle and the scream if she had killed herself?"01 Drake said,
"In the first place, things might have been knocked about during the
argument with her husband. In the second place, she might have faked a
murder to get her husband into trouble. Vengeance is mine, saith the
aggrieved wife."01 "Oh, come on," said Gonzalo contemptuously. "Marge
wouldn't do something like that in a million years."010 "You know," said
Drake, "you don't really know all that much about another person-even if
she's a twin."01336033601 Henry, whose face mirrored only polite
interest, said, "Yes, Mr. Trumbull?"01 "How about telling us all about
it? Who killed Mr. Gonzalo's sister?"01 Henry's eyebrows lifted
slightly. "I do not represent myself to be an expert, Mr. Trumbull, but
I must say that all the suggestions made by the gentlemen at the table,
including yours, are unlikely in the extreme. I myself think that the
police are perfectly correct and that if, in this case, the husband did
not do it, then housebreakers did. And these days, one must assume that
those housebreakers were drug addicts desperate for money or for
something they can convert into money."03360191 "You disappoint me,
Henry," said Trumbull.033601 Henry smiled gently.033601033601 "Sorry I
couldn't make it better, folks," said Gonzalo.033603360336010336051
Gonzalo stared a moment and said, "Okay, I'll go out, say my goodbyes,
take a taxi, and have it bring me back." He was back in ten
minutes.0336053360533603433602433605336010336033601933601433601 "Not
even the opening
headlines."033603360336033605336033603360336033603360336053360533601033605336024336051
"Well. . . What do we do?"033601933601 "I?" said Gonzalo hesitantly.01
"It was your sister, sir," said Henry softly.0314398124
Afterword0032265235322114344360-180014130 604360-1800771The Obvious
Factor004360-18007014360-180054360-18001 Geoffrey Avalon had reduced his
second drink to the halfway point and swirled it absently. "After last
month's tale about his murdered sister, it could be that he didn't---"01
He did not complete the sentence, but put down his glass carefully at
the seat he intended to take. The monthly banquet of the Black Widowers
was about to begin.04360-1800144360-180024"A poet,
then?"04360-1800294360-1800144360-1800191 "Oh, for heaven's sake," said
Avalon, the flat lines of his well-preserved face set in disappointment.
"Let him recite the poor thing. It takes thirty seconds and I find it
fun."04360-1800381 Halsted, who had been whispering to Drake, passed a
paper to him. Drake rose and declaimed:04360-18004274360-18001Who will
trust Trojan candor, as0010 T1 his sly deed of Pandoras001Puts an end to
the scarce-proclaimed truce?"004360-1800"Against my 0 reading it," said
Halsted. "Drake read it." "It's disappointing not to have Mario here,"
said Avalon. "He would ask what it
means."04360-1800194360-1800294360-1800341 Henry said, "I think you'll
find it quite wholesome."04360-1800104360-18001 Dr. Eldridge said, "Is
there a necessity of explaining these limericks, Dr. Avalon? Are there
tricks to them?"01 "No, not at all, and don't bother with the doctorate.
That's only for formal occasions, though it's good of you to humor the
club idiosyncrasy. It's just that Mario has never read the Iliad; 0 few
have, these days."01 "Pandarus, as I recall, was a go-between and gives
us the word 'pander.' That, I take it, was the sly deed mentioned in the
limerick."01 "Oh, no, no," said Avalon, unsuccessfully hiding his
delight. "You're thinking now of the medieval Troilus tale, which
Shakespeare drew on for his Troilus and Cres-sida. 0 Pandarus was the
go-between there. In the Iliad 0 he was merely a Lycian archer who shot
at Menelaus during a truce. That was the sly deed. He is killed in the
next book by the Greek warrior Diomedes."01 "Ah," said Eldridge, smiling
faintly, "it's easy to be fooled, isn't it?"01 "If you want to be," said
Rubin, but he smiled as the London broil arrived. There was no mistaking
the nature of the components there. He buttered a roll and ate it as
though to give himself time to contemplate the beauty of the meat.01 "As
a matter of fact," said Halsted, "we've solved quite a few puzzles in
recent meetings. We did well."01 "We did lousy," said Trumbull. "Henry
is the one who did well."01 "I include 0 Henry when I say 'we,' " said
Halsted, his fair face flushing.01 "Henry?" asked Eldridge.01 "Our
esteemed waiter," said Trumbull, "and honorary member of the Black
Widowers."01 Henry, who was filling the water glasses, said, "You honor
me, sir."01 "Honor, hell. I wouldn't come to any meeting if you weren't
taking care of the table, Henry."01 "Its good of you to say so,
sir."04360-180054360-1800144360-180051 "People fool themselves, in other
words," said Eldridge, breaking
in.04360-1800144360-18004360-180054360-18004360-1800144360-1800104360-180054360-18001
"I am," said Eldridge, "Associate Professor of Abnormal Psychology."01
"Where do you ... ?" began Rubin.01 Avalon interrupted, his deep voice
dominating, "Sorry, Manny, but I smell an evasion. You asked Dr.
Eldridge's profession and he gave you a title . . . What do you do Dr.
Eldridge, to occupy your time most significantly?"01 "I investigate
parapsychological phenomena," said Eldridge.01 "Oh, God," muttered
Drake, and stubbed out his cigarette.01 Eldridge said, "You disapprove
of that, sir?" There was no sign of annoyance on his face. He turned to
Henry and said, "No, thank you, Henry, I've had enough coffee," with
perfect calmness.01 Henry passed on to Rubin, who was holding his cup in
the air as a signal of its emptiness.01 "It's not a question of approval
or disapproval," said Drake. "I think you're wasting your
time."04360-180054360-18001 "Yes. And ghosts and spiritual phenomena,
too."01 "All right. Have you ever come across something you couldn't
explain?"01 "Explain in what way? I could explain a ghost by saying,
'Yes, that's a ghost.' I take it that's not what you mean."01 Rubin
broke in. "I hate to be on Drake's side right now, but he means to ask,
as you well know, whether you have ever come across any phenomenon you
could not explain by the accepted and prosaic laws of science."01 "I
have come across many such phenomena."01 "That you could not explain?"
asked Halsted.01 "That I could not explain. There's not a month that
passes but that something crosses my desk that I cannot explain," said
Eldridge, nodding his head gently.01 There was a short silence of
palpable disapproval and then Avalon said, "Does that mean that you are
a believer in these psychic
phenomena?"04360-180054360-18004360-1800104360-18004360-180054360-1800104360-18004360-1800144360-1800104360-18004360-180054360-1800104360-180054360-18004360-1800144360-180010
"Actually," said Rubin, at once, "it's quite possible, on the sub-atomic
level, to consider time as flowing
either-"014360-180054360-18004360-180054360-1800194360-18001 "Accidents
happen," said Eldridge equably. "At any rate, I'll return to Mary. Mary
never completed grade school and has earned what money she could earn by
serving behind a counter at the five-and-ten. She is not attractive and
no one will sweep her away from the counter, which may be good, for she
is useful there and serves well. You might not think so, since she
cannot add correctly and is given to incapacitating headaches, during
which she will sit in a back room and upset the other employees by
muttering gibberish to herself in a baleful sort of way. Nevertheless,
the store wouldn't dream of letting her go."01 "Why not?" asked Rubin,
clearly steeling himself to skepticism at every
point.04360-180054360-18001 "Losses quickly dropped to virtually nothing
in that particular five-and-ten despite the fact that the store is in a
bad neighborhood. The manager, of course, received the credit. Probably,
he deliberately kept the truth from being known lest anyone try to steal
Mary from
him.04360-1800144360-1800194360-1800434360-1800434360-1800384360-1800194360-1800294360-1800194360-18004360-1800194360-1800144360-1800144360-1800104360-180051
Henry said, "I have no general attitude, sir. I accept whatever it seems
to me I must accept."04360-1800101 "Go on, then," said Drake. "You
paused at the dramatic moment to throw us off."01 "Never," said
Eldridge. "I was saying that I did not take Mary seriously, until one
day she suddenly began to squirm and pant and mumble under her breath.
She does that now and then, but this time she muttered 'Eldridge.
Eldridge.' And the word grew shriller and shriller.01 "I assumed she was
calling me, but she wasn't. When I responded, she ignored me. Over and
over again, it was 'Eldridge! Eldridge!' Then she began to scream, Tire!
Oh, Lord! It's burning! Help! Eldridge! Eldridge!' Over and over again,
with all kinds of variations. She kept it up for half an
hour.04360-18001 "When we put it all together, we decided that there was
an old apartment house somewhere in San Francisco, possibly within
eyeshot of the Bridge, that had gone up in fire. A total of twenty-three
people were in it at the time it burst into fire, and of these, five did
not escape. The five deaths included that of a
child."04360-180054360-1800144360-180054360-180010 "Of, course," said
Eldridge. "How did this ignorant girl see a fire in full detail, get all
the facts correct-and believe me, we checked it out- at three thousand
miles."0110 Rubin said, "What makes the three-thousand-mile distance so
impressive? These days it means nothing; it's one sixtieth of a second
at the speed of light. I suggest that she heard the tale of the fire on
radio or on television-more likely the latter-and passed it on to
you.014360-1800484360-18001 "Why?" Rubin's voice faded out momentarily,
as though with astonishment, then came back in a shout. "Good God,
you've been working with these people for years and don't realize how
much they want 0 to hoax you. Don't you suppose there's a feeling of
power that comes with perpetrating a good hoax; and money, too, don't
forget."010 Eldridge thought about it, then shook his head. "She doesn't
have the brains to put something like this across. It takes brains to be
a faker-a good one, anyway."011 Trumbull broke in. "Well, now, Voss.
There's no reason to suppose she's in it on her own. A confederate is
possible. She supplies the hysteria, he supplies the brains."01 "Who
might the confederate be?" asked Eldridge softly.01 Trumbull shrugged.
"I don't know."01 Avalon cleared his throat and said, "I go along with
Tom here, and my guess is that the confederate is the manager of the
five-and-ten. He had noted her ability to guess at shoplifters, and
thought he could put this to use in something more splashy. I'll bet
that's it. He heard about the fire on television, caught the name
Eldridge, and coached her."01 "How long would it take to coach her?"
asked Eldridge. "I keep telling you that she's not very bright."01 "The
coaching wouldn't be difficult," said Rubin quickly. "You say she was
incoherent. He would just tell her a few key words: Eldridge, fire,
Golden Gate, and so on. She then keeps repeating them in random
arrangements and you intelligent parapsychologists fill it in."01
Eldridge nodded, then said, "That's interesting, except that there was
no time at all to coach the girl. That's what precognition is all about.
We know exactly what time she had her fit and we know exactly what time
the fire broke0 1 out in San Francisco., It so happens the fire broke
out at just about the minute that Mary's fit died down. It was as though
once the fire was actual, it was no longer a matter of precognition, and
Mary lost contact. So you see, there could be no coaching. The news
didn't hit the network TV news programs till that evening. That's when
we 0 found out and began our investigation in
depth."04360-180054360-18004360-1800104360-18004360-180054360-18001 "All
right, a prophetic fit, if you wish. She's muttering and mumbling and
screaming and doing everything in the world but speaking clearly. She
makes sound which you 0 interpret, and which you make fit together. If
it had occurred to you to hear her say something like 'atom bomb,' then
the word you interpreted as 'Eldridge' would have become 'Oak Ridge,'
for instance."01 "And Golden Gate?"01 "You might have heard that as
'couldn't get' and fitted it in
somehow."04360-1800104360-180054360-18001 Drake said uneasily, "Do you 0
accept it? Do you 0 think it was precognition?"04360-1800144360-180051
Eldridge went on. "I'm left in a position where I must refer to Sherlock
Holmes's great precept: 'When the impossible has been eliminated, then
whatever remains, however improbable, is the truth.' In this case, if
fakery of any kind is impossible, the precognition must be the truth.
Don't you all agree?"04360-18004360-180051 "The hell we do," said Rubin,
frowning.01 "Surely, then, a quotation from President Thomas Jefferson
would have sprung to mind."01 "What quotation?" asked Halsted.01 "I
imagine Mr. Rubin knows," said Henry.04360-1800584360-180051 "Let's not
play Twenty Questions, Manny. Go on, Henry, what are you getting
at?"04360-18001 Avalon said severely, "You mean there's a factor we
haven't considered?"01 "I'm afraid so, sir," said Henry, nodding.01
Avalon shook his head. "I can't think what it can be."04360-180051 "What
is it, then?" demanded Halsted, clearly annoyed. "Get to the
point!"04360-18001 Rubin got to his feet, straggly beard bristling, eyes
magnified through thick-lensed glasses, staring. "Of course! The fire
was set. 0 The woman could have been coached for weeks. The accomplice
goes to San Francicso and they coordinate. She predicts something she
knows 0 is going to happen. He causes something he knows 0 she will
predict."01 Henry said, "Are you suggesting, sir, that a confederate
would deliberately plan to kill five victims, including an
eight-year-old boy?"01 "Don't start trusting in the virtue of mankind,
Henry," said Rubin. "You're the one who is sensitive to wrongdoing."01
"The minor wrongdoings, sir, the kind most people0 1 overlook. I find it
difficult to believe that anyone, in order to establish a fancied case
of precognition, would deliberately arrange a horrible multi-murder.
Besides, to arrange a fire in which eighteen of twenty-three people
escape and five specific people die requires a bit of precognition in
itself."04360-180051 "Gentlemen!" said Eldridge peremptorily, and all
turned to look at him. "I have not told you the cause of the
fire."04360-18001 "On the contrary, Professor Eldridge, it confirms it
and makes it certain. Ever since you began to tell us this tale of Mary
and the fire, your every word has made it more and more certain that
fakery is impossible and that precognition has taken place. If, however,
precognition is impossible, then it follows of necessity, Professor,
that you have been lying."01 Not a Black Widower but exclaimed at that,
with Avalon's shocked "Henry!" loudest of all.01 But Eldridge was
leaning back in his chair, chuckling. "Of course I was lying. From
beginning to end. I wanted to see if all you so-called rationalists
would be so eager to accept parapsychological phenomena that you would
overlook the obvious rather than spoil your own thrill. When did you
catch me out, Henry?"04360-18001 "But why was it a possibility from the
start, Henry?" demanded Eldridge. "Do I look 0 like a liar? Can you
detect liars the way I had Mary detect shoplifters?"01 "Because this is
always 0 a possibility and something to be kept in mind and watched for.
That is where the remark by President Jefferson comes in."01 "What was
that?"04360-180051 "Yes," said Avalon at once, "but Jefferson was wrong.
Silliman did not 0 lie and stones did 0 fall from heaven."01 "Quite so,
Mr. Avalon," said Henry, unruffled. "That is why the quotation is
remembered. But considering the great number of times that
impossibilities have been reported, and the small number of times they
have been proven possible after all, I felt the odds were with
me."04360-1800374124 Afterword004360-18002304360-18001 As far as I am
concerned, if, when everything impossible has been eliminated and what
remains is supernatural, then someone is lying. If that be treason, make
the most of it.02360103034502 70134501061The
PointingFinger0403450701345019345024345019345051 "Perhaps I ought not to
have done so."034501034505345010345053450143450293450534501 "Yes," said
Levy with the energetic delight of an author greeting unexpected
recognition. "Have you read it?"01 Rubin, who was carrying, as he always
did, the self-conscious soul of a six-footer in his five-foot-four body,
looked solemnly at the other through his thick glasses and said, "I did,
and found it quite good."01 Levy's smile weakened, as though he
considered a judgment of "quite good" no good at all.01 Avalon said,
"Roger Halsted won't be with us today. He's out of town on something or
other. Sends his regrets and says to say hello to Mario if he shows
up."01 Trumbull said with his mouth down-curved in a sneer, "We're
spared a limerick."01 "I missed last month's," said Gonzalo. "Was it any
good?"01 "You wouldn't have understood it, Mario," said Avalon
gravely.0345034501 Trumbull said, in what was considerably more than an
ordinary speaking voice, "The Act of Union forming the United Kingdom of
England, Wales, and Scotland was made law at the Treaty of Utrecht in
1713."01 "No, it wasn't," said Rubin, his straw-colored and straggly
beard wagging indignantly. "The Act was passed in 1707."01 "Are you
trying to tell me, you dumb jackass, that the Treaty of Utrecht was
signed in 1707?"01 "No, I'm not," shouted Rubin, his surprisingly loud
voice reaching a bellow. "The Treaty of Utrecht was signed in 1713. You
guessed that part right, though God only knows how."034503450345051
"Here's my five dollars. Where's yours? Or can you spare a week's pay at
that two-bit job you've got?"03450345053450345051 "Host's privilege,"
said Avalon. "I'll check, as an impartial
observer."03450103450345053450534505345010 "Tell him that and he'll kill
you-if I don't first."01345034505834505345034501 "To Shakespeare?"
Avalon gazed down at his guest with lofty disapproval.01 "You bet. I've
been living with him for two months, reading him backward and forward
till one more 'Why, marry' or 'fretful porpentine' and I'll throw
up."034501 "Directly, sir. Coupe aux marrons."0034501 Ten minutes later,
Avalon placed spoon to water glass and tinkled the assemblage to
silence. "Host's privilege," he said. "It is time for the usual
inquisition, but our honored guest has let it slip that for two months
past he has been studying Shakespeare with great concentration, and I
think this ought to be investigated. Tom, will you do the honors?"01
Trumbull said indignantly, "Shakespeare? Who the hell wants to talk
about Shakespeare?" His disposition had not been improved by the loss of
five dollars and by the look of unearthly virtue upon Rubin's
face.0345034501 "None, as a science writer." He spoke with a distinct
Brooklyn accent. "It's just that I'm after three thousand
dollars."03450345010345034501034501934502434501934503450143450534501
"He's one of us. Best man here."034501034501 "A legacy from whom?" asked
Drake.03450141 "Get to the legacy," said Trumbull, showing some signs of
impatience.03450193450345034501 Levy went on, "He hid them in various
places. Old guys can be funny. He'd change the hiding place now and then
whenever he began to fear we might find them. Of course, we usually did
find them before long, but we'd never let on and we'd never touch them.
Except once! He put them in the clothes hamper and we had to give them
back to him and ask him to put them elsewhere, or sooner or later they
would get into the washing machine.010 "That was about the time he had a
small stroke-no connection, I'm sure-and after that he was a little
harder to handle. He grew morose and didn't talk much. He had
difficulties in using his right leg and it gave him a feeling of
mortality. After that, he must have hidden the bonds more efficiently,
for we lost track of them, though we didn't attach much importance to
that. We assumed he would tell us when he was ready.011 "Then two months
ago, little Julia, that's my younger daughter, came running to us to
tell us that Grandpa was lying on the couch and looking funny. We ran to
the living room, and it was obvious that he had had another stroke. We
called the doctor, but it was clear that his right side was gone
entirely. He couldn't speak. He could move his lips and make sounds, but
they came to no words.01 "He kept moving his left arm and trying to
speak and I said, 'Grandpa, are you trying to tell me something?' He
could just about tremor his head into a small nod. 'About the bonds?'
Again a small nod. 'You want us to have them?' Again a nod and his hand
began to move as though he were trying to
point.0345029345053450345010345034501434501 Gonzalo said, "What about
the binding? You know, in between the stuff that glues the pages and the
backstrip?"0345010345034501 "The hell with Shakespeare," said Trumbull
querulously. "Forget the clue. He had to leave them somewhere in the
house."01 "Why do you suppose that?" said Levy. "He might have put it in
a bank vault for all we know. He got around even after his first stroke.
After we found the bonds in the clothes hamper, he might have thought
the house wasn't safe."01 "All right, but he still might have put them
in the house somewhere. Why not just search?"010 "We did. Or at least
Caroline did. That was how we divided the labor. She searched the house,
which is a big, rambling one--one reason we could take in Grandpa- and I
searched Shakespeare, and we both came out with nothing."011 Avalon
untwisted a thoughtful frown and said, "See here, there's no reason we
can't be logical about this. I assume, Simon, that your grandfather was
born in Europe."01 "Yes. He came to America as a teen-ager, just as
World War I was starting. He got out just in
time."034503450293450483450243450103450343450345034345067345051 Avalon
banged the table. "Not now, gentlemen!"0345024345051 "In Hebrew, of
course," Levy said coldly.034501 "And War and
Peace?"003450343450583450583450343450345034501 "What was your father's
favorite play?" asked Trum-bull.01 "He liked Hamlet 0 of course. I know
he didn't like the comedies," said Levy, "because he felt the humor
undignified, and the histories meant nothing to him. Wait, he liked
Othello."001 "All right," said Avalon. "We ought to concentrate on
Hamlet 0 and Othello."001 "I read them," said Levy. "You don't think I
left them out, do you?"01 "And it would have to be some well-known
passage," Avalon went on, paying no attention. "No one would think that
just pointing to Shakespeare would be a useful hint if it were some
obscure line that were intended."01 "The only reason he just pointed,"
said Levy, "was that he couldn't talk. It might 0 have been something
very obscure which he would have explained if he could have talked."01
"If he could have talked," said Drake reasonably, "he wouldn't have had
to explain anything. He would just have told you where the bonds
were."01 "Exactly," said Avalon. "A good point, Jim. You said, Simon,
that after the old man pointed to Shakespeare, his face relaxed and he
stopped trying to speak. He felt that he had given you all you needed to
know."034501 "Let's reason it out, then," said
Avalon.03450345024345019345019345019345053450243450343450143450193450293450345053450103450345051
"I don't believe that," said Levy. "I asked him if he wanted us to have
the bonds and he nodded."01 "All he could do was nod, and he did 0 want
you to have them, but that was impossible. ... Do you agree with me,
Henry?"0345010345034505345034501 Avalon said, "Ah! You mean 'Is it so
nominated in the bond?' The bond is a legal contract, and the question
was whether something was a requirement of the contract."01 Drake said,
"Wait a bit. Didn't that bond involve a sum of three thousand
ducats?"0345034503450293450103450191 "It wouldn't appeal to my
grandfather," said Levy. "It pleads the obvious and cries out for an
equality my grandfather would not, in his heart, be willing to grant,
since I'm sure he felt superior in that he was a member of God's
uniquely chosen."034504334503834504834501934502434501 "I've just said
that."0345029345043345024"In Yiddish it's common enough," said Levy.
"Another one was 'It will help him like a dead man cups.' " 34502934501
There was a painful silence and finally Avalon said, "I can't think of
anything."03450103450345053450345053450534503450510 There was a short
silence and then Henry sighed and said, "In mystery stories-"01345034501
"Then why should he have pointed to Shakespeare, Henry?" asked Levy.
"Was it all just the vague delusions of a dying man?"01 "If your story
is correct," said Henry, "then I think he was indeed trying to do
something. He cannot, however, have been inventing a clue. He was doing
the only thing his dying mind could manage. He was pointing to the
bonds."01 "I beg your pardon," said Levy huffily. "I was there. He was
pointing to Shakespeare."01 Henry shook his head. He said, "Mr. Levy,
would you point to Fifth Avenue?"01 Levy thought a while, obviously
orienting himself, and then pointed.0345034501 "It seems to me, sir,"
said Henry, "that you are pointing to a picture of the Arch of Titus on
the western wall of this room."0345034501 Levy rubbed his chin. "You
mean my grandfather was only indicating a direction?"01 "It must be so.
He didn't say 0 he was pointing to Shakespeare. He merely pointed."010
"All right, then, what was he pointing at? The-the-" He closed his eyes
and fingered his mustache gently, as he oriented the room in his house.
"The Verrazano Bridge?"013450345010345053450345014345034505345051
"Hello, Julia? What are you doing up so late? . . . Never mind the TV
and get to bed. But first call Mamma, dear. . . . Hello, Caroline, it's
Simon. . . . Yes, I'm having a good time, but listen, Caroline, listen.
You know the bookcase with the Shakespeare in it? ... Yes, that 0
Shakespeare. Of course. Move it away from the wall. . . . The bookcase.
. . . Look, you can take the books out of it, can't you? Take them all
out, if you have to, and dump them on the floor. . . . No, no, just move
the end of the bookcase near the door a few inches; just enough to look
behind and tell me if you see anything. . . . Look about where the
Shakespeare book would be. . . . I'll wait,
yes."03450345053450345077345010 Levy reddened slightly and changed the
subject. "But how did you get the trick of it? When the rest of us-"011
"It was not difficult," said Henry. "The rest of you happened to track
down all the wrong paths, and I simply suggested what was
left."03450365124 Afterword00345023534501 That's perfectly right, but
here in the book I restore the original beginning. In fact, it occurs to
me that if I had written the series for the book version to begin with,
I would have interlocked them quite a bit. For instance, I wouldn't have
let the matter of Halsted's limerick version of the Iliad 0 and the
Odyssey 0 drop. As it was though, I felt that to come across them out of
order, or missing some and reading others, would spoil the
effect.034505223601030344551391 8034455821Miss
What?0344557063445553445514344555344551 In the men's room, Trumbull said
in a harsh whisper, "Why the hell did you bring that fellow?"01 "He's an
interesting guy," said Gonzalo defensively, "and it's host's privilege.
I can bring anyone I want."03445551 "He's a plainclothesman."03445510
Gonzalo raised his hands in a kind of helpless anger. His dark eyes
bulged as they usually did in moments of passion. "I know him
personally. I met him-it's none of your business how I met him, Tom-I 1
know 0 him. He's an interesting guy and I want him
here."034455344555344553445534455103445534455344551 Trumbull said, "You
realize this could be very embarrassing for Henry. Did you consult
him?"01 Gonzalo played with one of the brass buttons of his blazer. "If
I see that Henry's embarrassed, I'll use host's privilege and cut the
proceedings."03445534455344553445551 "At the moment," said Gordon, in a
rather rich baritone, "by adding to the pleasure of this occasion, I
hope."0344553445551 Trumbull shot a furious glance at Gonzalo and said,
"No, no, that's all wrong. Some guests have presented problems, but that
was more or less a side issue. All that's expected of them is
interesting conversation."03445534455141 "That's exactly what I've been
given to understand," he said. "Now I am here in a strictly social
capacity and not as a member of the Police Department at all. Just the
same, I can't help having a professional interest in the matter. In
fact, I'm damned curious about Henry, and I've come to test him. ... If
I may, that is," he added in response to the cold silence that had
fallen over everyone else.034455103445514344551 He turned to the guest
and went on earnestly, "Mr. Gordon, on some half-dozen occasions I have
been able to make some obvious point or other in connection with some
problem that arose at the dinners. The puzzles were, in themselves,
trivial, and not at all the sort that would interest a policeman. I know
quite well that in solving the kind of cases that interest policemen,
what is most important are records, informants, rather tedious
procedural work, the cooperation of many different men and agencies. All
of this is quite beyond my abilities.01 "In fact, I could not even do
what I have done were it not for the other members of the club. The
Black Widowers are ingenious men who can find complicated answers to any
problem. When they are all done then, assuming none of the complicated
answers are correct, I can sometimes wiggle past the complications to
the simple truth. That is all I do, and I assure you that it is not
worth your while to test me."01 Gordon nodded his head. "In other words,
Henry, if there's a gangland killing and we have to track down half a
dozen hoods and investigate their alibis, or try to find some bystanders
not too afraid to tell us what they saw, you couldn't help
us."0344555344551 "Probably not, sir."034455344551 "I suppose we can
call it that," said Gordon.03445551 Gonzalo looked uncomfortable. Then
he said defiantly, "Go on, Lieutenant, show it to him."01 "Hold on,"
said Trumbull, pointing his blunt finger at Gonzalo. "Have you seen it,
Mario?"0344551034455101 "Can you make sense out of
it?"034455243445529344554834455383445529344552934455193445551 The
message, in full, written in a scrawled hand,
went:0344554133445534455230344555344551 Gordon said, "That note was
delivered to a girl at the entrance to a restaurant within which the
Miss Earth contestants were holding a press
conference."0344553445534455344551 Avalon looked austere and said, "I
suppose that the Jezebels mentioned in the note referred to the young
ladies of the Miss Earth contest."01 "That seems a natural thought,"
said Gordon. "The question is: Which one?"01 "All of them, I should
say," said Avalon. "The note used the plural, and the kind of person who
uses the term in this context would not make fine distinctions. Anyone
who presents her beauty to the public gaze for judgment would be a
Jezebel. All of them would be
Jezebels."034455344553445514344551034455103445514344551034455143445553445534455143445553445514344551
"Because there are foreign contestants, I suppose," said Rubin.010
"That's right. There are about sixty contestants altogether, and exactly
one-Miss United States-is homegrown. We'd just as soon nothing happened
to any of them, even a minor incident. I don't say that it would plunge
the world into a crisis if anything happened, but the State Department
would be very unhappy. So a note like this means that the police have to
supply protection for all sixty girls and these days we don't have all
that manpower to waste."011 "If you don't mind," said Trumbull frowning,
"what the hell do you expect us to do about it?"01 Gordon said, "It's
just possible he may not be planning to kill all the girls. He may have
only one in mind, so that is why he uses the singular when he talks of
death. Perhaps Henry might give us some ideas as to how to narrow it
down. We'd rather concentrate on ten girls than on sixty. We'd rather
concentrate on one girl only, in fact."01 "From that note?" said
Trumbull, with perfectly obvious disgust. "You want Henry to pick out
one Miss Earth contestant from that note?"01 He turned to look at Henry,
and Henry said, "I have no 0 idea, Mr. Trumbull."01 Gordon put the note
away again. "I thought you might tell me who Rahab is. Why should he
call one particular girl Rahab and threaten to kill her?"01 Gonzalo said
suddenly, "Why should we suppose that Rahab applies to the girl he's
after? Maybe it's his signature. Maybe it's a pseudonym he's using
because Rahab was some important prophet or executioner in the
Bible."034455103445553445553445534455344553445551 "Of course. And that's
why I think 'Jezebel' and 'Rahab' both apply to all the girls and should
both be plural. Both Jezebel and Rahab are Biblical representatives of
immoral women, and I0 take it that our note writer, whoever he may be,
conceives all the Miss Earth candidates to be just that."0344555344551
Avalon said, "When a Fundamentalist who's a little past the bend speaks
of immorality, or when he starts calling someone a Jezebel, there is no
need, in my opinion, for the existence of real immorality. It's probably
purely subjective. Any woman who rouses feelings of sexual excitement
within him will seem to him to be immoral; and the one who does so most
will seem to him to be most immoral."03445534455344555344551 Avalon
shook his head. "I don't know that we can dismiss motive quite that
easily, but, in any case, we won't get anywhere if we head down the
wrong path. Despite what Manny says, I don't think there's any
parallelism between Jezebel and Rahab."034455344551 Rubin said, "I'll
explain it to you, if you want. Jezebel was the daughter of the King of
Tyre, who was also a priest of Astarte. She was probably a priestess
herself. As for Rahab, she was probably not a common harlot, but a
priestess who participated in fertility rites. To the Israelites that
was being a harlot."01 Halsted said, "Not everybody has gone into the
Bible the way you have, Manny. The Bible calls Jezebel a queen and Rahab
a harlot, and the average reader wouldn't go past that."03445543344551
The Bible passed from hand to hand, and Halsted said, "The name isn't
spelled the same. It's 'Rachab' in
Matthew."03445510344555344553445534455534455344555344551 "Because
throughout Old Testament history the rival great powers were those in
the Tigris-Euphrates Valley and on the Nile. Babylon clearly typifies
the former, so Rahab must typify the latter. There's no dispute there.
Biblical scholars agree that 'Rahab' stands for Egypt there."01 "In that
case," said Avalon, "I don't think we have to fall back on Henry. I
suspect that it's Miss Egypt that our mysterious friend is after. And
that makes sense, too. There are a couple of million Jewish people in
this city and considering the present situation between Israel and
Egypt, one of them, with a little derangement, might feel called upon to
threaten Miss Egypt."01 Gordon said, "An interesting thought. There's
only one trouble."0344555344553445534344553445551 "The priestly writers
of the first book of Genesis cleaned up the Babylonian myths and removed
the polytheism, but they left traces. In the beginning, before the first
day of creation, according to Chapter 1, Verse 2 of Genesis, And the
earth was without form and void; and darkness was upon the face of the
deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. 0 Well,
the Hebrew word translated as 'the deep' is 'tehom' and some
commentators think that is a version of Tiamat and that this verse is
all that is left of the cosmic
struggle."03445534455534455193445510344551434455344551 Trumbull shouted,
"God damn it, Manny. You're not a revivalist preacher any more. Where's
this all getting us?"01 Rubin looked up indignantly and closed the
Bible. "If you'll let me talk, Tom," he said, with exaggerated dignity,
"and curb your impulse to bellow, I'll tell you."01 He looked about
impressively. "I now suspect that to the fellow who wrote this note,
Rahab meant the raging power of the sea. Now what is the raging power of
the sea today? Who controls the sea? The United States does. With our
aircraft carriers, our nuclear submarines, our Polaris missiles, we have
the power of Rahab. I think maybe he's after Miss United States."01 "Is
that so?" said Halsted. "The United States has been the predominant sea
power only since World War II. It hasn't had time to enter legend. It's
Great Britain that's the ruler of the sea in song and story. 'Britannia
rules the waves.' I vote for Miss Great Britain."01 Gordon interposed.
"There's no Miss Great Britain. There's a Miss England,
though."034455344554334455534455141 Trumbull said, "Why does the writer
have to be Jewish? Most Fundamentalists are Protestants and they've had
some neat terms in their time for the Pope. He was the 'Whore of
Babylon' to some of them and Rahab was a harlot. I don't suppose there's
a Miss Vatican City, but how about Miss
Italy?"0344551034455344551434455534455103445534455534455103445534455534455103445514344551034455344551434455141
Gordon broke into a laugh. "You win again, Henry," he said. "Everything
I told you is true enough, but it happened last year. The person in
question was caught. He had a knife in his hand, but he wasn't really
dangerous. He surrendered quietly and he's in a mental hospital now. He
was quite incoherent. We could never be sure what his motive was except
that he was sure his victim was particularly
wicked.0344551934455193445513124
Afterword0034455235344551934455534455102360103034503450721The Lullabyof
Broadway0020345069634501 "According to tradition," began Geoffrey Avalon
with the kind of solemnity that befitted his profession as patent
lawyer, "we have always met right here."01 "If tradition is the master,"
said Rubin, "why the bylaws?"01 And in the end he had had his way,
carrying it finally when he pointed out that he was a gourmet cook and
Mario Gonzalo had grinned and said, "Let's go and smell him burn the
hamburgers."01 "I do not serve hamburgers," said Rubin body, but by that
time everyone had conceded the point.01 So Avalon and James Drake, who
had both come in from across the Hudson on the same train, stood in the
lobby of Rubin's West Side apartment house and waited for the doorman to
pay attention to them. It was quite clear that they could not get in
without the doorman's permission by anything short' of violence.01
Avalon muttered, "It's the fortress mentality. It's all over New York.
You can't go anywhere without having to pass the gimlet eye and being
frisked for weapons."034502934501034505345034501034505The squawking
sound of Rubin's voice came clearly. "Send them up. Send them up."01 The
doorman held the door open for them, but Avalon hesitated on the
threshold. "Do you have many incidents here, by the
way?"034501434501434503450534501 "Splendid," said Avalon with great
enthusiasm, as though to make up for his previous surprise. "Doorman,
this gentleman is with us."01 Henry hung back. "Would you like to
inquire of Mr. Rubin, sir?"01 The doorman, having held the door
patiently through this, said, "No, that's all right. You go right
ahead."01 Henry nodded, and all three advanced through the large blue
lobby to the bank of elevators.01 Drake said, "Henry, I haven't seen an
outfit like yours in years. They'll mob you in New York if you go around
dressed like that."01 Henry looked down upon himself briefly. His suit
was a charcoal brown and cut so conservatively that Drake was clearly
wondering where the establishment could be found that would have such
garments for sale. The shoes were a sober black, the shirt a gleaming
white, and the tie, a narrow and somber gray held with a neat tie
clip.01 Crowning it all was the dark-brown derby which Henry now doffed,
holding it lightly by the brim.034503450534501 Avalon said, "The trouble
is that some people consider the thing to do to be molesting women in
laundries."01 "Yes," said Henry, "I heard what the doorman said. At
least we can hope there will be no trouble today."01 One of the
elevators arrived at the lobby and a lady with a dog got off. Avalon
looked inside, right and left, then entered. They rose to the fourteenth
floor without trouble.0345038345034505345010 "It's all right-let me get
past you for a minute-but it's small. Of course, we don't have children,
so we don't need it much larger, and being in Manhattan has its
conveniences for a writer."011 "Yes," said Avalon. "I listened to some
of the conveniences downstairs. The doorman said women have trouble in
the laundry."01 "Oh, hell," said Rubin contemptuously. "Some of the
dames here want 0 trouble. Ever since the Chinese delegation to the
United Nations took over a motel a few blocks down, some of the dowagers
here see the yellow menace everywhere."034505345010 Henry, the only one
sitting at the table, and with an as yet untouched drink before him,
looked surprised-an expression which somehow did not put a single
wrinkle into his unlined face. He said, "Pardon me, Mr. Rubin. Do you
mean 1 your 0 apartment was entered?"01 "Well, yes, the apartment lock
can be opened with a strip of celluloid, I think. That's why everyone
puts in fancy locks in addition."0345034501 "Did she get hurt?" asked
Gonzalo, his ordinarily prominent eyes bulging slightly.010 "Not really.
She was shook up, that's all. She yelled like anything-about the best
thing she could have done. The guy ran. If I'd been there, I'd have
taken after him and caught him, too. I'd have-"011 "It's better not to
try," said Avalon austerely, stirring his drink by moving the ice with
his forefinger. "The end result of a chase could be a knife in the ribs.
Your 0 ribs."010 "Listen," said Rubin, "I've faced guys with knives in
my time. They're easy to ban- Hold it, something's burning." He dashed
into the kitchen.013450534503450345034501 "Besides," said Drake, "an
important government operative like you is above suspicion."01 Trumbull
snorted and his lined face twisted into a scowl, but he didn't rise to
the bait. That he was a code expert all the Black Widowers knew. What he
did with it, none of the Black Widowers knew, though all had the same
suspicion.034501 Gonzalo laughed. "It does seem a
herd."0345053450103450534503450534501034505345034501 Avalon put out the
last of the knives with a flourish and said, "What did they get,
Rubin?"01 "You mean the guy who broke in? Nothing. Jane must have come
back just as he started. He messed up some of the items in the medicine
chest; looking for drugs, I suppose. I think he picked up some loose
change, and my recording equipment was knocked about. He may have been
trying to carry off my portable stereo to hock it, but he just had a
chance to move it a bit. . . . Who wants music, by the way?"01 "No one,"
shouted Trumbull indignantly. "You start making your damned noise, and
I'll0 steal the stereo and kick every one of your tapes intd the
incinerator."034502160 Rubin grunted. "If I had a bigger kitchen-" The
wail of a siren sounded from outside. Drake jerked a thumb over his
shoulder toward the open window. "The lullaby of
Broadway."01345034505345034501 "And it's not as though you can really
hear the music and enjoy it," he went on. "You just hear that damned
bass, thump, thump, thump, at a subsonic level that turns your bones to
water."01 Halsted said, "I know. In my place, we've got a couple who
have fights and my wife and I listen, but we can never hear the words,
just the tone of voice. Infuriating. Sometimes it's an interesting tone
of voice, though."03450534501 "Well, if you insist on living in a
beehive," said Avalon, "you have to take the consequences." His neat and
graying beard seemed to bristle with high morality.01 "That's a real fat
hunk of comfort," said Rubin. "Henry, you're going to have another
helping of turkey."010 "No, really, Mr. Rubin," said Henry, with a kind
of helpless despair. "I just can't-" And he stopped with a sigh,
since-his plate was heaped high.013450534501 He tilted his head in an
attitude of listening and, automatically, all conversation stopped and
all listened. Except for the steady whine of traffic outside, there was
nothing.010 Rubin said, "Well, we're lucky. He isn't doing it now;
hasn't for a while, in fact. Listen, everyone, dessert was a kind of
disaster and I had to improvise. If anyone doesn't want to eat it, I've
got cake from the bakery, which I wouldn't ordinarily recommend, you
understand-"0134505345034501 Henry looked at his plate, still piled
high, and said, "My frustration is not so much at being unable to help
wait on table, as at being unable to understand."01 "Unable to
understand what?" asked Rubin, coming in with desserts on a tray. They
looked very much like chocolate mousse.01 "Are you having a carpenter
working in this apartment house?" asked Henry.01 "What carpenter? . . .
Oh, you mean what I said. No, I don't know what the hell he is. I just
call him a carpenter. He's forever banging. Three in the afternoon. Five
in the morning. He's forever banging. And always when I'm writing and
want it particularly quiet. . . . How's the Bavarian cream?"01 "Is that
what this is?" asked Drake, staring at it
suspiciously.0345034503450345053450345053450345053450345053450534501
"What for?" asked Rubin, his eyes widening behind the magnifying effect
of his thick-lensed spectacles.01 "Something I have heard this night
puzzles me and I cannot get you to answer my
questions."034505345014345034505345034501 "Yes. How long has it been
going on?"01 "How long?" said Rubin passionately. "For
months."034501034503450345010 Trumbull held up his hand. "Wait a while.
Let's not have any of this poltergeist horse manure. Manny, you're not
going to try to bring in the supernatural, here. Let's get one thing
straight first-"011 Halsted said, "It's Henry that's doing the quizzing,
Tom."01 "I'm aware of that," said Trumbull, nodding his head frigidly.
"Henry, may I ask a question?"01 "If," said Henry, "you are about to ask
why Mr. Rubin, hearing a, noise, can't tell where it's coming from, it
is what I am about to ask."01 "Go ahead," said Trumbull. "I'll help
myself to more coffee."01 Henry said, "Would you answer the question,
Mr. Rubin?"0345091345010345053450345053450101 "Suppose your fan isn't on
duty," said Gonzalo argu-mentatively. "You've got to have doormen around
the clock and your fan has to sleep."0345053450345034505345077345034501
"Well, you're wrong. One or two would say something about hearing it
once or twice. The trouble is, no one cared. 0 Even if they heard it,
they didn't care. New Yorkers get so deadened to noise, you could blow
them up and they wouldn't care."03450345034501 "What do you mean, you
can still 0 swear it?" asked03450341 Henry.034501 "I consulted Charlie
about it."01 "The doorman?"034501 "What good are they?" said Rubin
impatiently. "All I know about the owner is the fact that he lets the
air conditioning blow out every heat wave because he prefers to patch it
with the finest grade of chewing gum. And to get the superintendent you
have to pull in Washington. Besides, Charlie's a good guy and we get
along. Hell, when0345034501 "Sure she did. But first Charlie!"0345010
"He said there were no complaints. It was the first he had heard of it.
He said he would investigate. He did and he swore up and down that there
were no carpenter's workshops anywhere in the building. He said he had
men go into each apartment to check air conditioners-and that's one sure
way of getting in anywhere."0134503450345034501 Gonzalo said, "Maybe
it's some gal practicing with castanets, or some percussion
instrument."01 "Come on. I can tell something rhythmic from just random
banging."01 "It could be a kid," said Drake, "or some pet. I lived in an
apartment in Baltimore once and I had banging directly overhead, like
someone dropping something a few hundred times a day. And that's what it
was. They had a dog that kept picking up some toy bone and dropping it.
I got them to put down a cheap rug."01 "It's no kid and it's no pet,"
said Rubin stubbornly. "I wish you wouldn't all assume I don't know what
I'm hearing. Listen, I worked in a lumberyard once. I'm a pretty fair
carpenter myself. I know the sound of a hammer on wood."01 "Maybe
someone's doing some home repairs," said Halsted.034501 Henry said, "Is
that where the situation stands
now?034501063450345034503450345034503450345034501 Gonzalo said, "Then
you did see the super?"01 "No. There's such a thing as a tenants'
organization."034505345010 get after the landlord. It's as though no one
ever heard of a tenant annoying another tenant and yet I'd say that
nine-tenths of the annoyances in an apartment house are caused by
tenant-tenant interactions. I said that. I-"011 Henry interrupted again.
"Are you a regular member of the organization, Mr.
Rubin?"034505345014345034501034501 "It must have been a most eloquent
address," growled Trumbull. "A pity I wasn't there to hear you. What did
they say?"034501034505345034501034503450345034501 "I'm not scared of
whoever it is."034508591 "Perhaps I came too late. I may have missed
something. It seems to me, Mr. Avalon, that you asked the doorman if
there had been any incidents of a distressing nature in the apartment
house and he said there had been a robbery in a twentieth-floor
apartment the last year and that a woman had been hurt in some fashion
in the laundry room."01 Avalon looked thoughtful and nodded.03450345051
There was a thoughtful pause. Gonzalo said, "Maybe0 1 he didn't like to
gossip."0345034501 "What do you make of it, Henry?" asked Avalon.01 "Is
he involved, somehow?"03450345048345019345051 Rubin said, "Only that
Jane told me some of the tenants were worried about the Chinese getting
in here.""Somehow I feel that is too weak a reason to account for your
non sequitur. 0 Did Mrs. Rubin say that the man she had surprised in the
apartment was an Oriental?"034505345024345014345029345034503450"Perhaps
I can present evidence." "What kind?"034501 Rubin said, "Easiest thing
in the world." He stepped through an archway.034503450381 "Mr.
Trumbull," said Henry, "what connections you have with the government, I
don't know, but it is my guess that in a few moments you will want to
get in touch with the proper people and my suggestion is that you begin
by having the doorman thoroughly questioned, and0 10
that-"0134503450345034501 For a moment all were frozen, then Rubin
muttered,034501 He stared a moment, then said, "What the hell!" and
flung the door open. The doorman was standing there, red-faced and
clearly uneasy.010 The doorman said, "It took time to get someone to
stand in for me. . . . Listen," he said, his eyes darting uneasily from
person to person. "I don't want trouble, but-"013450345010 "It's been
getting to me. And now someone asked me about troubles here. . . . You
did, sir," he said to Avalon. "Then more people came and I think I know
what it must be about. I guess some of you are investigating the
break-in and I didn't know what was going on but I guess I was out of
line and I want to explain. This fellow-"0134503450534501 Rubin looked
up, as though listening. Then he said, "Hammering messages? Who'd
believe it?"010 "Exactly why it worked, Mr. Rubin," said Henry softly,
"and might have continued to work had there not been in the same
apartment house a writer of your-if I may say so-marked
eccentricity."01203450370124 Afterword00345022634501 I was getting more
and more irritated at it and might have worked myself into an ulcer when
it occurred to me that I might use it as the central point of a short
story. So I did. This one.01 Now when I hear the banging (it isn't
really so often or so bad) I just shrug cheerfully and remember that it
supplied me with a story. Then I don't mind it at all.0236010303421291
100342129821Yankee Doodle Went to Town0403421297063421291 Even Mario
Gonzalo, who had served an uneventful hitch in the army in the late
fifties, and who was known to have acerbic views concerning officers,
was pleasant enough. He propped himself on one of the sideboards and
began sketching. Avalon looked over Gonzalo's shoulder briefly, as
though to make sure the artist member of the Black Widowers would not,
somehow, draw the Colonel's head upward into a crown of ass's ears.01 It
would have been most inappropriate for Gonzalo to have done so, for
there was every indication of clear intelligence about Davenheim. His
face, round and a little plump, was emphasized by outmoded hair, short
above and absent below. His mouth curved easily into a friendly smile,
his voice was clear, his words crisp.03421296234212910 "And are
talkative," said Davenheim firmly, overriding the other with the calm
authority of a colonel. "And you're a writer. . . . You're Mario
Gonzalo, the artist, and I don't even need your description since you're
drawing. . . . Roger Halsted, mathematician, partly bald. The only
member without a full head of hair, so that's easy. . . . James Drake,
or, rather, Dr. James Drake-"011 "We're all doctors by virtue of being
Black Widowers," said Drake from behind a curl of cigarette smoke.01
"You're right, and Jeff explained that carefully. You're Doctor Doctor
Drake because you smell of tobacco smoke at ten
feet."0342129342129342129"The waiter," said Avalon, flushing and staring
at his drink. "I'm sorry, Henry, but I didn't know what to tell Colonel
Davenheim about you. To say you're the waiter is ridiculously
insufficient and to say more would endanger Black Widower
confidentiality."01 "I understand," said Henry agreeably, "but I think
it would be well to serve the Colonel. What is your pleasure, sir?"01
For a moment the Colonel looked blank. "Oh, you mean drinks? No, that's
all right. I don't drink."03421293421293421293421292434212951 "I think
we'll be eating any minute," said Avalon hastily, looking at his
watch.0342129193421291934212951 "Damned good one," said Davenheim
gravely, "but he didn't get much of a chance to shine. We were both in
the legal end of matters, which meant desk work. The difference is that
he had the sense to get out once the war was over. I didn't."034212951
"You mean you're still involved with military law?"03421291 "That's
right."03421292934212938342129243421291034212929342129343421293421291
Halsted said, in what was clearly intended to be a change of topic, "I'm
not happy with my limerick for the fifth book of the
Iliad."003421293421291 "And the Odyssey," 0 said Halsted. "The trouble
with the fifth book is that it deals chiefly with the feats of the Greek
hero Diomedcs, and 1 feel I ought to have him part of the rhyme scheme.
I've been at it, off and on, for months."01 "Is that why you've spared
us limericks the last couple of sessions?" asked Trumbull.01 "I've had
one and I've been ready to read it, but I'm not quite satisfied with
it."03421293421291 "Call him Tydeides," said Avalon. "Homer frequently
used the
patronymic."03421293421293421293421293421292113421293421291393421291Even
gods were his quarries,001And the war-loving Ares001He struck down and
left nearly for dead."00342129230342129534212934212934212951 "Oh, we do
our poor best," said Avalon. "The restaurant charges in proportion, but
it's only once a month."010 Davenheim plied his fork enthusiastically
and said, "Dr. Halsted, you're a mathematician-"011 "I teach mathematics
to reluctant youngsters, which isn't quite the same
thing."0342129534212934212934212951 "Oh, well," said Davenheim, with
heavy modesty, "in an amateur way."0342129103421291434212934212910
Davenheim spoke quickly to cut off Rubin's rejoinder. He said, "You've
got me off the subject." He leaned to one side to allow Henry to place
the rum cake before him. "I mean, Dr. Halsted-very well, Roger-that
perhaps you switch to the classics to get your mind off some knotty
mathematics problem. Then, while your conscious mind is permutating
rhymes, your unconscious mind is---"011 "The funny thing about that,"
said Rubin, seizing 0 his own chance to cut in, "is that it works. I've
never been so stymied by a plot that I couldn't get it worked out by
going to a movie. I don't mean a good 0 movie that really absorbs me. I
mean a bad one that occupies my conscious mind just sufficiently to
allow my unconscious free reign. A spy-action film is best."01 Gonzalo
said, "I can't follow the plot of those things even when I'm paying
attention."01 "And yet they're aimed at the twelve-year-old mind," said
Rubin, striking back at last.010 Henry poured the coffee, as Davenheim
said, "I agree with what Manny says. I happen to think that a day spent
on phonetics is sometimes the best way of contributing to a problem at
work. But isn't there another aspect to this? It's easy to see that by
keeping the conscious mind occupied, we leave the unconscious free to do
as it wishes underground. But will it stay underground? Might it not
obtrude aboveground? Might it not make itself seen or heard, if not to
the person himself-the person who is thinking-then to
others?"0134212934212934212977342129534212910342129143421291934212914342129103421291934212914342129243421291
"The other one's," said Davenheim.03421291034212951 "I don't know that
he needs to be grilled," said Avalon.03421291 "I don't know that I want
to do that," said Davenheim grimly. "It's rather a delicate matter."01
"You have my word," said Trumbull, "that everything said here is in
strictest confidence. I'm sure Jeff has told you that already. And that
includes our esteemed Henry. And, of course, you needn't go into full
detail."034212953421291 "Well, what the devil," sighed Davenheim.
"Actually, it's not much of a story as stories go, and it may be
nothing; nothing at all. I may be so damned 00 wrong. But if I'm not
wrong it's going to be embarrassing for the army, and expensive for the
country. I could almost hope I was wrong, but I've committed myself so
far that if I am wrong it may permanently-hamper my career. Yet I'm not
so far away from retirement."011 For a moment he seemed lost in thought,
then he said fiercely, "No, I want 0 to be right. However embarrassing,
it's got to be stopped."03421293421291 "It's not treason, then?" said
Trumbull, a bit impatiently.010 "No. Just corruption! Stinking, fetid
corruption. A gang of men--soldiers, I'm sorry to say, officers,
conceivably high officers-intent on bleeding Uncle Sam a
bit."013421292934212953421291 Davenheim said, "It's one thing not to pay
your taxes out of principle, to admit it, and go to jail for it. It's
another thing to duck your share of the fair load for no other reason
than to see others carry their own burden and yours to boot. Both
actions are equally illegal, but I have some respect for the former. In
the case I'm talking about the only motivation is simple greed. It is
quite possible that millions of dollars of the taxpayers' money are
involved."0342129510 "That's all. So far. I can't prove it and it's a
difficult thing to track down without a damned good scent. If I push too
hard and can't back my suspicions all the way, I'll be torn in half.
Some big names might be involved- and might
not."0134212934212934212934212953421291 "Unlikely as it seems," said
Davenheim dryly. "That may be so. But I have no proof."01 "Can't you
question the two men you have?" said Gonzalo.01 "I have," said
Davenheim. "And with Farber I can get nothing. He is that most dangerous
of men, the honest tool. I believe he was too stupid to know the
significance of what he did, and that if he did know, he wouldn't have
done it."03421293421291 "You mean a lead to someone higher up?" asked
Rubin.03421291 "What about the other fellow?" asked Gonzalo.03421291
Halsted said, "If it's only a guess that there's something more to this
than those two guys, why do you take it so seriously? Aren't the chances
actually very good that you're wrong?"01 "To other people it would seem
so," said Davenheim. "And there's no way in which I could explain why I
know I'm not 0 wrong except by pleading experience. After all, Roger, an
experienced mathematician can be quite certain that a particular
conjecture is true and yet be unable to prove it by the strict rules of
mathematical demonstration.
Right?"03421293421293421291034212934212953421291 "Look," said Trumbull.
"I have a little experience in such things. Do you suppose Klotz can
break the case wide open for you? He's only a private, and I suspect
that even if there is 0 some sort of conspiracy, he knows very little
about it."03421291034212953421296234212910 "He sings," said Davenheim.
"Well, not quite-he hums. And it's always the same
tune."01342129342129241 Avalon said heavily, "Even President Grant, who
had no ear for music, knew that one. He said he knew only two tunes. One
was 'Yankee Doodle' and the other0 1
wasn't."034212934212934212934212934212934212934212951 "Yankee Doodle,"
said Rubin thoughtfully, half to himself. For a moment he looked at
Henry, who was standing near the sideboard, a small vertical crease
between his eyebrows. Henry caught Rubin's eye but did not
respond.03421291 Davenheim lifted his upper lip in mild derision. "Can
you believe I didn't think of that? I had a dozen of his close friends
in. Nobody had ever heard him hum anything!"01 "They might be lying,"
said Gonzalo. "I wouldn't tell an officer anything if I could avoid
it."01 "They might never have noticed," said Avalon. "Few people are
good observers."01 "Maybe they lied, maybe they didn't know," said
Davenheim, "but, taken at face value, their testimony, all of it, would
make me think that the humming of 'Yankee Doodle' is specifically
associated with my investigation and nothing
else."034212953421293421295334212934212934212934212917043421291Stuck a
feather in his cap001And called it macaroni.001Yankee Doodle, keep it
up,001Yankee Doodle dandy.001Mind the music and the step001And with the
girls be handy."003421292303421291 "The last four lines are the chorus
and show the country boy stepping it up at a city dance. He is mockingly
told to stamp away and be gallant to the ladies. The word 'dandy,' which
first came into use about mid-eighteenth century, meant the same as
'macaroni.' "01 Gonzalo said, "Okay, Manny, you win. It's not nonsense.
But how does it help Sam's
case?"03421291934212924342129483421292434212953421291 "Not a Yankee
Doodle," said Davenheim stubbornly.01"He 0 might think so," said
Drake.0342129101 Halsted said, "Maybe he's looking forward to a future
when he's going to be enriched by his crimes and when he'll be able to
strut his way to town; when he can 'stick a feather in his cap' in other
words."03421293834212934342129483421293421291 Davenheim looked
surprised, but said, "Well, you're here, Henry, so you might as
well."010 Henry said, "Mr. Avalon recited eight lines of 'Yankee
Doodle'-four lines of a verse followed by the four lines of the chorus.
But verse and chorus have different tunes. Did Private Klotz hum all
eight lines?"0110 Davenheim thought a moment. "No, of course not. He
hummed--uh-" He closed his eyes, concentrated, and went "Dum-dum dum-dum
dum-dum-dum, dum-dum dum-dum dum-du-u-um-dum. That's all. The first two
lines."013421293421293421293421293421291 Henry said, "Colonel Davenheim,
this is a long shot. If the answer is no, then I'll have nothing more to
say. If, however, the answer is yes, it's just possible we may have
something."03421291 "What's the question, Henry?" asked Davenheim.01 "At
the same base where Sergeant Farber and Private0342129483421291 "Yes,"
he said strenuously. "Captain Charles Goodwin. How the hell 0 could you
possibly have known that?"01 "In that case, he may be your man. I'd
forget about Klotz and Farber, sir, if I were you, and concentrate on
the captain. That might be the one step upward that you wanted. And the
captain may prove an easier nut to crack than Private Klotz has been."01
Davenheim seemed to find no way to speak further and Trumbull said, "I
wish you'd explain, Henry."01 "It's the 'Yankee Doodle,' as the Colonel
expected. The point is, though, that Private Klotz hummed 0 it. We have
to consider what words he was thinking when he hummed."01 Gonzalo said,
"The Colonel said he hummed the lines that go 'Yankee Doodle went to
town, A-riding on a pony.' "01 Henry shook his head. "The original poem
'Yankee Doodle' had some dozen verses and the macaroni lines were not
among them. They arose later, though they're now the most familiar. The
original poem tells of the visit of a young farmboy to the camp of
Washington's Continental Army and his naivete is made fun of, so I
believe Mr. Rubin's interpretation of the nature of the song to be
correct."034212953421291034212934212953421291910 "If it stood alone,
sir, yes," said Henry. "But that's why I asked about a Captain Gooden in
the camp. If he were a third member of the conspiracy, the push to hum
the tune might be irresistible. The first verse, which is the only one I
know-"0134212951 But here Rubin interrupted. Standing up, he
roared:03421298453421291And there we saw the men and boys001As thick as
hasty puddih'."00342129226342129243421291 "I hope so. More coffee,
Colonel?" said Henry.0342129274124
Afterword0034212923034212934212953421291 Now I need never take my
typewriter. Since then I have handwritten several other items, while I
was on board ship.01 And you know what? While I was writing the story I
discovered an odd thing. Writing by hand with pen and ink is very
silent. 0 That noise I always make writing isn't the writing; it's the
typewriter. I 0 thought you'd want to know that.03421292360103034501821
110034509110 The Curious Omission00345070134501 Halsted looked hurt and
his high forehead grew pink. He said, "I called 00 the restaurant.
Henry-"011 Henry had adjusted the bread baskets and seen to it that the
bran muffins affected by Geoffrey Avalon were in plain view. He said,
"Yes, Mr. Halsted. The company has been informed that you would be a
little late. I believe Mr. Rubin is merely amusing himself at your
expense."0345034501 "So where is he?" asked Mario Gonzalo, more than
usually nattily dressed in a maroon blazer, matching striped shirt, and
matching patterned tie.01 "Downstairs. Men's room. His name is Jeremy
At-wood; he's about sixty-five; and he has a problem."01 Avalon from his
considerably better than six feet of height drew his thick and graying
eyebrows together. "I've been thinking, gentlemen, of this very matter.
The original purpose of the Black Widowers consisted of nothing more
than dining and conversation. We have now0 1 reached the point where we
never fail to have a problem to agitate us and disturb our digestion.
What happens when we can't find one? Do we disband?"01 Gonzalo said,
"Then we're back to conversation without a purpose. There's always
Manny."01 Rubin said, his sparse beard lifting noticeably, "Nothing I
say is without a purpose, Mario. Failing all else, there's the vague
hope my words may serve to educate you. For one thing, I can show you
why your latest painting is completely wrong."0345051 "Only out of
relief when you said it was your last painting and only until I found
out you meant it was your
latest."034503450534501034503450534501034503450534501934501 "I don't
blame you," said Rubin at once. "Teachers of English literature have
probably turned out more illiterates than have any other force of
illegitimate culture in the world."01 "You see, Mr. Atwood," said
Gonzalo, striving for his own back, "Manny Rubin is a writer whose works
have never been discussed by any teacher who was sober at the time."01
Trumbull spoke at once to cut off Rubin's retort. "What's your own line
of work, Mr. Atwood?"01 "I'm retired now, but once upon a time I was a
civil engineer," said Atwood.01 Avalon said, "You do not have to answer
any questions now, Mr. Atwood. That will come with the dessert."01 It
turned out to be unnecessary advice since Rubin had the bit in his teeth
now and was off and running. With the soup, of which he had little, he
developed the thesis that teachers of English generally and of English
literature in particular had as their peculiar object the placing of the
English language in chains and the making of literature a fossil in
murky amber.01 Over the main course, roast stuffed duck, Rubin proceeded
to probe the motives of the English-teaching criminals and found it to
consist of an embittered and hate-filled envy of those who could, past
and present, use the English language as a tool.01 "Like Emmanuel Rubin,
of course," said Gonzalo in a stage whisper.01 "Like me," said Rubin,
unabashed. "I know more grammar than any so-called English teacher and
have read more literature more closely than they can possibly have done,
any of them. The thing is I don't let the grammar bind me or the
literature force me."01 "Anyone who writes ungrammatical twaddle can say
the same," said Avalon.01 "That means something, Jeff," said Rubin
hotly, "only if you're prepared to say that I write ungrammatical
twaddle."0345053345024345014345053450345010345053450345014345034501434501
"All right, then. Let's begin . . . Henry! Is the brandy on the way? ..
. Who does the grilling, Roger?"03450534501 "Only a manner of speaking,
sir. We are interested in your literary problem. Would you care to tell
us about it in whatever way you please? We will ask questions when that
seems advisable, if you don't mind."010 "Oh, I won't mind," said Atwood
cheerfully. His eyes darted from one to the other. "I warn you that it
isn't much of a mystery-except that I don't know what to make of it."011
"Well, we might not know, either," said Gonzalo, touching his brandy to
his lips.01 Drake, who was nursing the remains of a cold and who had to
cut down on his smoking in consequence, stubbed out a half-finished
cigarette morosely, and said, "We'll never know if we don't hear what it
is." He blew his nose into a bright red handkerchief and stuffed it into
his jacket pocket.01 "Won't you go on, Mr. Atwood?" said Trumbull. "And
let's have some silence from the rest of you."01 Atwood folded his hands
on the edge of the table almost as though he were back in grade school,
and a formal intonation colored his words. He was reciting.01 "This all
involves my friend Lyon Sanders, who was, like myself, a retired civil
engineer. We had never actually worked together but we had been
neighbors for a quarter-century and were very close. I am a bachelor; he
was a childless widower; and we both led lives that might,
superficially, have seemed lonely. Neither of us was, however, for we
had each carved out a comfortable niche.010 "I myself have written a
text on civil engineering which has had some success and for some years
I have been preparing a rather elaborate, if informal, tale of my
experiences in the field. I doubt that it will ever be published but, of
course, if it is-0110 "But that's beside the point. Sanders was a more
aggressive person by far than ever 1 was; louder; more raucous; with a
rather coarse sense of humor. He was a games person-"013450534501 "He
read books on the subject and he invented games himself. Some were
clever and I would suggest he patent them and place them on the market.
But that was not what he wanted at all. It was only his own amusement
that interested him. That was where I came in, you see. I was what he
sharpened his analyses on."0345034501 "They do," said Rubin suddenly.
"Any decent game can be analyzed mathematically. There's a whole field
of recreational mathematics."01 "I know this," Atwood managed to
interpose gently, "but I don't know that Sanders went at it in any
orthodox manner. He never offered to explain it to me and I never
bothered to ask.03450534501 Drake looked at an unlit cigarette as though
he wished it would light itself and said, "Didn't that depress you?"01
"Not really. It was fun trying to beat him and sometimes I did. I beat
him just often enough to keep up my
interest."034503450345053450345034501 Trumbull frowned. "I should think
that would annoy you. Didn't you ever feel like taking a poke at him?"01
"Never. It was just his way," said Atwood. "Nor need you think that poor
Lyon's death was in the least suspicious. You needn't search for any
motives of that kind. He died at the age of sixty-eight of complications
from a mi!d but long-standing case of diabetes.0345010345051 "He said
that on what turned out to be his deathbed. I was all he had, except for
the various hospital personnel that hovered about impersonally. He had
distant relatives, but none of them visited. Then late in the evening,
when I wondered if I ought to leave and return the next morning, he
turned his head to me and said in a voice that seemed almost normal, The
curious omission in Alice.'0345053450103450103450534501 "And you heard
him plainly?"01 "Quite plainly," said
Atwood.0345029345024345053450345051 "I accepted my envelope and found
inside only the words I had heard from my friend's dying lips. 'The
curious omission in Alice.' . . . And that's where the matter now
stands."034501 "I mean I haven't located the bank. Six months have
passed and I have six months more."034501034503450345034501034503450101
"I don't think so," said Atwood. "But then he wouldn't have to. His
lawyer could attend to that part."0345034501034501 "I don't think it's
quite the same," said Atwood thoughtfully. "The bank may be thousands of
miles away, but the piece of microfilm, or just an ordinary piece of
very thin paper, for all I know, might be close at hand. But no matter
how close at hand, it might as well be a thousand miles away." He
sighed. "Poor Lyon will win this game, too, I'm
afraid."034502434501633450345034501 "Would your old friend have known
this of you?" "Oh, yes." Atwood stirred resdessly. "Gentlemen, I have
had six months to think of this. I realize that Sanders would not have
hidden the fihn in his own house since he left it to someone else and
knew I would have no opportunity to search it. He had ample opportunity
to hide it in my house, which he visited as often as I visited his, and
it is in my house that I think it exists."01 Trumbull said, "Not
necessarily. He might have felt certain that there would be some
favorite books, some certain memento, you would have asked for."01 "No,"
said Atwood. "How could he be certain I would? He would have left such
an item to me in his will."034501 "No," said Atwood, smiling. "You have
no idea how unlike Sanders that would be. ... I tell you. I have thought
that since he gave me a year to find it, he must have been pretty
confident that it would stay in place for01 that length of time. It
wouldn't be likely to be part of something I might throw away, sell, or
easily lose."034503450534505345053450345051 "Which brings us back," said
Avalon heavily, "to the message. If you understood it, you would know
where to look and you would see
it."034505345053450534501934502934501934503450241 Atwood said, "Haven't
I? I'm sorry. It's one of those things I know so well, I somehow expect
everyone to0 1 know it."03450345034503450345034503450103450534501 Henry,
standing quietly by the sideboard, said, "It is certainly an interesting
point, Mr. Gonzalo."01 "Interesting, hell," said Trumbull. "What's
curious about it? It's an omission of convenience. Lots of people would
say Alice."001 Halsted said, "Quite apart from that, I don't see what
Adventures in Wonderland 0 would mean. 0 It's no more helpful than the
original message. Here's my idea. Alice in Wonderland00 -beg pardon,
Jeff, 1 Alice's Adventures in Wonderland00 -contains verses, most of
which are parodies of well-established poems of the
day-"0134503450345034501 "I'll be glad to do so," said Atwood politely.
"The point had not occurred to
me."034507734503450345034503450345034503450345034503450345034501 "The
six I listed," said Avalon. "The King, Queen, and Knave of Hearts; the
two, five, and nine of spades."0345053450103450534503450345010345051
Henry nodded. "I ask because it seems to me that we've all discussed
Alice in Wonderland 0 without mentioning that there was a
sequel."03450103450383450343450343450433450345034503450345024 "And
rooks?" said Henry. Avalon frowned in silence for a while, then shook
his0 1
head.034503450345034503450345034501034501434501034505345010345053450433450433450101
"I'll take you," said Halsted.03450383450422124 Afterword0034502061
This, in a way, is a twice-told tale.034502434501434501 So I completely
rewrote the story, lengthening it a good deal, placing it against the
Black Widower background, and now I feel ever so much better. Especially
since now my solution is included.02360103034501 1203450961Out of
Sight00345070134502434503834503434506734501 Halsted's soft voice was
unequal to the free-for-all and he methodically beat his spoon against
the water goblet till the decibels had simmered down.010 He said, "Let's
be reasonable. The subject under discussion is not poetry in general,
but the limerick as a verse form. My point is this-I'll repeat it,
Manny-that the worth of a limerick is not dictated by its subject
matter. It's easier-"011 James Drake stubbed out his cigarette, twitched
his small grizzled mustache, and said in his hoarse voice, "Why do you
call a dirty limerick dirty? The Supreme Court will get you."01 Halsted
said, "Because it's a two-syllable word with a meaning you all
understand. What do you want me to say?
Sexual-excretory-blasphemous-and-miscellaneous-generally-irreverent?"01
Avalon said, "Go on, Roger. Go on. Make your point and don't let them
needle you." And, from under his luxuriant eyebrows, he frowned
austerely at the table generally. "Let him
talk."034503450345034502934501434505345014345034505345010345041834501BUT
I THINK THAT THE QUEEN0034502113450345024034502434501034501934501434501
"I think I've made my point," said Halsted. "The humor can be
visual."0345019345014345014345053450534501434501934502434501934501034501
"No. I put it to you, Tom. If Manny questions our034501 "Not half as
sick as I am," said Long, rather unexpectedly, "I'd just as soon not
discuss any aspect of space exploration."01 The heavy flatness of the
remark seemed to dampen spirits all around. Even Halsted seemed
momentarily at a loss for any other subject to introduce to someone
connected with NASA.01 Then Rubin stirred in his seat and said, "I take
it, Dr. Long, that this is a recently developed attitude of yours."01
Long's head turned suddenly toward Rubin. His eyes narrowed. "Why do you
say that, Mr. Rubin?"01 Rubin's small face came as close to a simper as
it ever did. "Elementary, my dear Dr. Long. You were on the cruise that
went down to see the Apollo shot last winter. I'd been invited as a
literary representative of the intellectual community, but I couldn't
go. However, I got the promotional literature and noticed you were
along. You were going to lecture on some aspect of the space program, I
forget which, and that was voluntary. So your disenchantment with the
subject must have arisen in the six months since the cruise."01 Long
nodded his head very slightly a number of times and said, "I seem to be
more heard of in that connection than in any other in my life. The
damned cruise has made me famous, too."03450534501034501 Trumbull's
voice rose above the rest. "Now wait a while, Waldemar. God damn it,
will all of you sit down? Waldemar, you too. What's the excitement
about? Rubin, what is 0 all this?"01 Rubin looked down at his empty
coffeecup and lifted it as though he wished there were coffee in it so
that he could delay matters by taking a sip. "I was just demonstrating a
chain of logic. After all, I write mysteries. I seem to have touched a
nerve." Then, gratefully, he said, "Thanks, Henry," as the cup before
him sparkled black to the brim.0345034501 Long nodded his head again, in
precisely the same slight and rapid way as before, and then settled back
in his seat. "All right. I'm sorry, Mr. Rubin. I jumped too soon. The
fact is I will 0 be leaving NASA. To all intents and purposes, I have 00
left it-and at the point of a shoe. That's all. ... We'll change the
subject. Tom, you said coming here would get me out of my dumps, but it
hasn't worked that way. Rather, my mood has infected you all and I've
cast a damper on the party. Forgive me, all of
you."01345053450345014345034505345034503450345051 There was another
pause and then Avalon, speaking in his most impressively austere tone,
said, "Well, sir, what 0 story? Is there anything you can tell us about
it or must you leave it at no more than what you have already
said?"034501034505345096345053450345034501 "And then the paper was
stolen?" said Gonzalo
excitedly.03450534503450534503450103450383450383450534501034505334504334504834501
"Not to myself," said Long.0345014345010345058345048345034503450534501
"Maybe," said Long indifferently. "I remember every detail of that
dinner; I've gone over and over it in my mind. It was an ethnic dinner,
so everyone was supplied with little Dutch hats made out of paper and
special Indonesian dishes were supplied. I wore the hat but I hate
curried food and the Doctor asked about my speech just as a small dish
of curried lamb was put before me as an hors d'oeuvre. Between fuming
over official stupidity and sickening over the smell of curry, I just
burst out. If it hadn0 't been for the curry, perhaps-011 "Anyway, after
dinner I discovered that someone had been in my cabin. The contents of
the paper weren't so important, classification or not, but what was
important was that someone had taken action so quickly. Someone on the
ship was part of a spy network and that was more important than the
actual coup. Even if the present item were not important, the next might
be. It was important to report the matter and, as a loyal citizen, I
did."01 Rubin said, "Isn't the Doctor the logical suspect? He asked the
question and he would be listening to the answer. The others might not
have. As an officer, he would be used to the ship, know how to get to
your cabin quick-0345012034505345034501 "When did she have a chance to
reach your cabin?" asked Halsted.01 "She left shortly after I made my
remark. I was brooding too deeply to be aware of it at the time but of
course I remembered it afterward. She came back before the fuss over the
hot chocolate came up because I remember her trying to
help."03450534503450534501 Avalon said, "What's the fuss over the hot
chocolate you referred to?"03450103450483450345010 "Jones was much
quieter. He seemed horrified, at first, by Smith's outrageous comments
but eventually he was matching him, I noticed-rather, I think, to
Smith's discomfiture."01345053450345053450534501 "She jumped up. So did
everyone else. Miss Robinson moved quickly toward her to help. I noticed
that and that's how I know she was back by then. Mrs. Smith waved help
away and left in a hurry. Smith, looking suddenly confused and upset,
tore off the paper Dutch hat he was wearing and followed. Five minutes
later he was back, talking earnestly to the head steward. Then he came
to the table and said that Mrs. Smith had sent him down to assure the
steward that she was wearing nothing that couldn't be washed, that she
hadn't been hurt, that it wasn't anyone's fault, that no one was to be
blamed.0345051 Avalon said, "And that means she had time to get to your
cabin."0345034503450345010345053450345034501434503450191 "I haven't told
you about Mrs. Jones. Dark hair and eyes, very vivacious. Had a penchant
for sharp cheeses, always taking a bit of each off the tray when it was
brought round. She had a way of looking at you when you talk that had
you convinced you were the only object she saw. I think Jones was rather
a jealous type in his quiet way. At least, I never saw him more than two
feet from her, except this one time. He got up and said he was going to
the cabin and she said she would be there soon. Then she turned to me
and said, 'Can you explain why those terraced icefields on Mars are
significant? I've been meaning to ask you all during dinner and didn't
get a0 1 chance.'03450345034503450345014345024345010345053450101 Rubin
said, "Are you sure those six are indeed the only possibilities. Are you
sure you really didn't mention it to anyone else?"034501034502934501
"Who heard you on the phone? Maybe there were eavesdroppers."01 "There
were ship's officers standing around, certainly. However, my boss
expressed himself Aesopically. I knew what he meant, but no one else
would have."03450345034505345034501733450534501034503450534501 Long
looked up, surprised. "A question?"0345034505345010345053450534501
"Yes," said Henry. "Did that come
up?"03450534503450534501434501434501434501934501434501434501034501434501434502934501
"Are you sure? He'd had a three-month cram course, you said. And he
might have known English better than he pretended. You would be willing
to conceive that Mrs. Smith was not as sweet and thoughtful underneath
as on the surface, and that Mrs. Jones's vivacity was pretense, and the
Doctor's respectability and Smith's liveliness and Jones's devotion and
Miss Robinson's need to go to the bathroom. Might not the waiter's
ignorance of English also be pretense?"01 "By God," said Long, looking
at his watch. "If it weren't so late, I'd call Washington now."01
Trumbull said, "If you know some home phone numbers, do 0 call now. It's
your career. Tell them the waiter ought to be investigated, and for
heaven's sake, don't tell them you got the notion from someone
else."03450534501 Henry said softly, "No reason for anyone to think of
it. Only very few are as interested in waiters as I
am."02434505091Afterword00345023534501034501 As a matter of fact, I have
at the moment of this writing, completed and sold six more Black
Widowers, five to Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine 0 and one to The
Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction. 0 You see, then, that it is
quite possible that eventually you will be asked to read something
entitled More Tales of The Black Widowers.0010 I hope so, because its'
fun writing these stories-and thank you all for reading
them.0123601030020}  
