{112521
010331033{}{;000;00255;0255255;02550;2550255;25500;2552550;255255255;
00128;0128128;01280;1280128;12800;1281280;128128128;192192192;}{}{}
119161680072072031251354 1201631701198402 41372090312532628800000 8
241033103310331033 {

}{-2-12184 "In a Good Cause" }{181 Copyright 'a9 1951 by Henry Holt and
Company, Inc.}{ }{-1-91 In the Great Court, which stands as a patch of
untouched peace among the fifty busy square miles devoted to the
towering buildings that are the pulse }{-1-71 beat of the United Worlds
of the Galaxy, stands a statue.}{ }{-1-61 It stands where it can look at
the stars at night. There are other statues ringing the court, but this
one stands in the center and alone.}{ }{-1-71 It is not a very good
statue. The face is too noble and lacks the lines of }{-1-91 living. The
brow is a shade too high, the nose a shade too symmetrical, the }{-1-51
clothing a shade too carefully disposed. The whole bearing is by far too
}{0-41 saintly to be true. One can suppose that the man in real life
might have frowned at times, or hiccuped, but the statue seemed to
insist that such }{ -2-121 imperfections were impossible.}{ }{-2-101 All
this, of course, is understandable overcompensation. The man had no
}{-1-91 statues raised to him while alive, and succeeding generations,
with the ad-vantage of hindsight, felt guilty.}{ }{-1-61 The name on the
pedestal reads "Richard Sayama Altmayer." Under-}{-2-101 neath it is a
short phrase and, vertically arranged, three dates. The phrase is:
}{-1-91 "In a good cause, there are no failures."The }{-1-91 three dates
are June 17, 2755; }{-1-71 September 5, 2788; December 32, 2800;the
years being counted in the }{-1-91 usual manner of the period, that is,
from the date of the first atomic explo-}{-1-71 sion in 1945 of the
ancient era.}{ }{0-21 None of those dates represents either his birth or
death. They mark }{-1-91 neither a date of marriage or of the
accomplishment of some great deed or, }{-1-81 indeed, of anything that
the inhabitants of the United Worlds can remem}{0-41 ber with pleasure
and pride. Rather, they are the final expression of the }{-1-91 feeling
of guilt.}{ }{-1-61 Quite simply and plainly, they are the three dates
upon which Richard }{-1-91 Sayama Altmayer was sent to prison for his
opinions.}{ }{-2-101 1}{-2-101 lune 17, 2755}{ }{0-3194 At the age of
twenty-two, certainly, Dick Altmayer was fully capable of }{194 feeling
fury. His hair was as yet dark brown and he had not grown the }{0-4194
mustache which, in later years, would be so characteristic of him. His
nose }{194 was, of course, thin and high-bridged, but the contours of
his face were }{0-1194 youthful. It would only be later that the growing
gauntness of his cheeks would convert that nose into the prominent
kndmark that it now is in the }{0-4194 minds of trillions of school
children.}{ }{0-2194 Geoffrey Stock was standing in the doorway, viewing
the results of his }{-1-5194 friend's fury. His round face and cold,
steady eyes were there, but he had yet }{ 0-4194 to put on the first of
the military uniforms in which he was to spend the rest }{-1-5194 of his
life. }{0-4194 "' He said, "Great Galaxy!"}{ }{0-4194 Altmayer looked
up. "Hello, Jeff."}{ }{194 "What's been happening, Dick? I thought your
principles, pal, forbid destruction of any kind. Here's a book-viewer
that looks somewhat de-}{0-3194 stroyed." He picked up the pieces.}{
}{0-3194 Altmayer said, "I was holding the viewer when my wave-receiver
came }{0-4194 through with an official message. You know which one,
too."}{ }{194 "I know. It happened to me, too. Where is it?"}{ }{0-4194
"On the floor. I tore it off the spool as soon as it belched out at me.
Wait, }{194 let's dump it down the atom chute."}{ }{0-2194 "Hey, hold
on. You can't"}{ }{194 "Why not?"}{ }{0-4194 "Because you won't
accomplish anything. You'll have to report."}{ }{0-4194 "And just
why?"}{ }{194 "Don't be an ass, Dick."}{ }{0-2194 "This is a matter of
principle, by Space."}{ }{0-2194 "Oh, nuts! You can't fight the whole
planet."}{ }{194 ;}{194 "I don't intend to fight the whole planet; just
the few who get us into }{-1-8194 wars."}{ }{194 Stock shrugged. "That
means the whole planet. That guff of yours of }{0-2194 leaders tricking
poor innocent people into fighting is just so much space-dust. Do you
think that if a vot e were taken the people wouldn't be over-}{0-4194
whelmingly in favor of fighting this fight?"}{ }{0-2194 "That means
nothing, Jeff. The government has control of"}{ }{194 "The organs of
propaganda. Yes, I know. I've listened to you often }{0-4194 enough. But
why not report, anyway?"}{ }{-1-6194 Altmayer turned away.}{ }{0-1191
Stock said, "In the first place, you might not pass the physical
examina-}{0-2191 tion."}{ }{191 "I'd pass. I've been in Space."}{
}{0-1191 "That doesn't mean anything. If the doctors let you hop a
liner, that only }{191 means you don't have a heart murmur or an
aneurysm. For military duty }{0-2191 aboard ship in Space you need much
more than just that. How do you know }{-1-6191 you qualify?"}{ }{191
"That's a side issue, Jeff, and an insulting one. It's not that I'm
afraid to }{0-4191 fight."}{ }{191 "Do you think you can stop the war
this way?"}{ }{191 "I wish I could," Altrnayer's voice almost shook as
he spoke. "It's this }{0-3191 idea I have that all mankind should be a
single unit. There shouldn't be wars }{191 or space-fleets armed only
for destruction. The Galaxy stands ready to be opened to the united
efforts of the human race. Instead, we have been }{0-3191 factioned for
nearly two thousand years, and we throw away all the Galaxy."}{ }{0-1191
Stock laughed, "We're doing all right. There are more than eighty
inde-pendent planetary systems."}{ }{0-1191 "And are we the only
intelligences in the Galaxy?"}{ }{191 "Oh, the Diaboli, your particular
devils," and Stock put his fists to his }{0-2191 temples and extended
the two forefingers, waggling them.}{ }{191 "And yours, too, and
everybody's. They have a single government ex-tending over more planets
than all those occupied by our precious eighty }{0-2191 independents."}{
}{191 "Sure, and their nearest planet is only fifteen hundred light
years away }{0-1191 from Earth and they can't live on oxygen planets
anyway."}{ }{0-1191 Stock got out of his friendly mood. He said, curtly,
"Look, I dropped by }{0-2191 here to say that I was reporting for
examination next week. Are you coming with me?"}{ }{191 "No."}{ }{0-2191
"You're really determined."}{ }{191 "I'm really determined."}{ }{0-2191
"You know you'll accomplish nothing. There'll be no great flame ignited
on Earth. It will be no case of millions of young men being excited by
your example into a no-war strike. You will simply be put in jail."}{

}{191 "Well, then, jail it is."}{ }{0-1191 And jail it was. On June 17,
2755, of the atomic era, after a short trial in }{191 which Richard
Sayama Altmayer refused to present any defense, he was sentenced to jail
fo r the term of three years or for the duration of the war, whichever
should be longer. He served a little over four years and two months, at
which time the war ended in a definite though not shattering }{0-2191
Santannian defeat. Earth gained complete control of certain disputed
aster-}{191 oids, various commercial advantages, and a limitation of the
Santannian }{-2-12191 navy.}{ }{191 The combined human losses of the war
were something over two thou-}{ }{-1-51 sand ships with, of course, most
of their crews, and in addition, several }{-1-91 millions of lives due
to the bombardment of planetary surfaces from space. }{-1-51 The fleets
of the two contending powers had been sufficiently strong to restrict
this bombardment to the outposts of their respective systems, so }{-1-71
that the planets of Earth and Santanni, themselves, were little
affected.}{ }{-1-61 The war conclusively established Earth as the
strongest single human }{-2-131 military power.}{ }{-1-91 Geoffrey Stock
fought throughout the war, seeing action more than once }{-1-81 and
remaining whole in life and limb despite that. At the end of the war he
ha d the rank of major. He took part in the first diplomatic mission
sent out }{0-31 by Earth to the worlds of the Diaboli, and that was the
first step in his }{-1-81 expanding role in Earth's military and
political life.}{

}{-3-161 2}{-3-161 September 5, 2788}{ }{-1-91 They were the first
Diaboli ever to have appeared on the surface of Earth }{-2-101 itself.
The projection posters and the newscasts of the Federalist party made
that abundantly clear to any who were unaware of that. Over and over,
they }{-1-91 repeated the chronology of events.}{ }{-1-51 It was toward
the beginning of the century that human explorers first }{-2-111 came
across the Diaboli. They were intelligent and had discovered
interstel-}{-2-101 lar travel independently somewhat earlier than had
the humans. Already the galactic volume of their dominions was greater
than that which was human-}{-3-151 occupied.}{ }{-1-91 Regular
diplomatic relationships between the Diaboli and the major hu-man powers
had begun twenty years earlier, immediately after the war be-}{-1-61
tween Santanni and Earth. At that time, outposts of Diaboli power were
}{-1-51 already within twenty light years of the outermost human
centers. Their }{-2-101 missions went everywhere, drawing trade
treaties, obtaining concessions on }{-2-121 unoccupied asteroids.}{
}{0-41 And now they were on Earth itself. They were treated as equals
and }{-1-71 perhaps as more than equals by the rulers of the greatest
center of human population in the Galaxy. The most damning statistic of
all was the most loudly proclaimed by the Federalists. It was this:
Although the number of }{-1-81 living Diaboli was somewhat less than the
total number of living humans, humanity had opened up not more than five
new worlds to colonization in }{-1-91 fifty years, while the Diaboli had
begun the occupation of nearly five hun-}{ -3-161 dred.}{ }{-1-61 "A
hundred to one against us," cried the Federalists, "because they are
}{-1-51 one political organization and we are a hundred." But relatively
few on }{-1-81 Earth, and fewer in the Galaxy as a whole, paid attention
to the Federalists and their demands for Galactic Union.}{ }{-2-101 The
crowds that lined the streets along which nearly daily the five Diaboli
}{-1-51 of the mission traveled from their specially conditioned suite
in the best}{ }{0-1189 hotel of the city to the Secretariat of Defense
were, by and large, not hostile. }{189 Most were merely curious, and
more than a little revolted.}{ }{189 The Diaboli were not pleasant
creatures to look at. They were larger and considerably more massive
than Earthmen. They had four stubby legs set close together below and
two flexibly-fingered arms above. Their skin was }{ 0-2189 wrinkled and
naked and they wore no clothing. Their broad, scaly faces wore }{189 no
expressions capable of being read by Earthmen, and from flattened re-
gions just above each large-pupilled eye there sprang short horns. It
was these last that gave the creatures their names. At first they had
been called devils, and later the politer Latin equivalent.}{ }{189 Each
wore a pair of cylinders on its back from which flexible tubes ex-tended
to the nostrils; there they clamped on tightly. These were packed
}{0-1189 with soda-lime which absorbed the, to them, poisonous carbon
dioxide from }{189 the air they breathed. Their own metabolism revolved
about the reduction of sulfur and sometimes those foremost among the
humans in the crowd caught a foul whiff of the hydrogen sulfide exhaled
by the Diaboli.}{ }{189 The leader of the Federalists was in the crowd.
He stood far back where he attracted no attention from the police who
had roped off the avenues and who now maintained a watchful order on the
little hoppers that could be maneuvered quickly through the thickest
crowd. The Federalist leader was gaunt-faced, with a thin and
prominently bridged nose and st raight, graying }{-1-6189 hair.}{ }{189
He turned away, "I cannot bear to look at them."}{ }{189 His companion
was more philosophic. He said, "No uglier in spirit, at least, than some
of our handsome officials. These creatures are at least true to their
own."}{ }{189 "You are sadly right. Are we entirely ready?"}{ }{189
"Entirely. There won't be one of them alive to return to his world."}{
}{189 "Good! I will remain here to give the signal."}{ }{189 The Diaboli
were talking as well. This fact could not be evident to any human, no
matter how close. To be sure, they could communicate by mak- ing
ordinary sounds to one another but that was not their method of choice.
The skin between their homs could, by the actions of muscles which
dif-fered in their construction from any known to humans, vibrate
rapidly. The tiny wave s which were transmitted in this manner to the
air were too rapid to be heard by the human ear and too delicate to be
detected by any but the most sensitive of human instrumentation. At that
time, in fact, humans remained unaware of this form of communica tion.}{
}{189 A vibration said, "Did you know that this is the planet of origin
of the }{-1-5189 Two-legs?"}{ }{189 "No." There was a chorus of such
no's, and then one particular vibration said, "Do you get that from the
Two-leg communications you have been studying, queer one?"}{ }{-1-91
"Because I study the communications? More of our people should do so
}{-2-111 instead of insisting so firmly on the complete worthlessness of
Two-leg cul-}{-1-81 ture. For one thing, we are in a much better
position to deal with the Two-}{-1-51 legs if we know something about
them. Their history is interesting in a }{-1-81 horrible way. I am glad
I brought myself to view their spools."}{ }{-1-51 "And yet," came
another vibration, "from our previous contacts with }{0-31 Two-legs, one
would be certain that they did not know their planet of }{-1-91 origin.
Certainly the re is no veneration of this planet, Earth, or any
memo-}{-1-71 rial rites connected with it. Are you sure the information
is correct?"}{ }{0-31 "Entirely so. The lack of ritual, and the fact
that this planet is by no }{-1-91 means a shrine, is perfectly
understandable in the light of Two-leg history. }{-1-61 The Two-legs on
the other worlds would scarcely concede the honor. It }{-1-91 would
somehow lower the independent dignity of their own worlds."}{ }{-1-51 "I
don't quite understand."}{ }{-1-71 "Neither do I, exactly, but after
several days of reading I think I catch a glimmer. It would seem that,
originally, when interstellar travel was first }{-1-91 discovered by the
Two-legs, they lived under a single political unit."}{ }{-2-101
"Naturally."}{ }{-1-81 "Not for these Two-legs. This was an unusual
stage in their history and }{-1-51 did not last. After the colonies on
the various worlds grew and came to }{-1-81 reasonable maturity, their
first interest was to break away from the mother }{-2-121 world. The
first in the series of interstellar wars among these Two-legs began
}{-1-81 then."}{ }{-1-91 "Horrible. Like cannibals."}{ }{-1-71 "Yes,
isn't it? My digestion has been upset for days. My cud is sour. In
}{-2-111 any case, the various colonies gained independence, so that now
we have the }{-2-101 situation of which we are well aware. All of the
Two-leg kingdoms, repub-}{-1-81 lics, aristocracies, etc., are simply
tiny clots of worlds, each consisting of a dominant world and a few
subsidiaries which, in turn, are forever seeking } {-1-61 their
independence or being shifted from one dominant to another. This }{-1-81
Earth is the strongest among them and yet less than a dozen worlds owe
it }{-2-131 allegiance."}{ }{-2-101 "Incredible^ that these creatures
should be so blind to their own interests. }{-1-61 Do they not have a
tradition of the single government that existed when }{-1-91 they
consisted of but one world?"}{ }{-1-91 "As I said that was unusual for
them. The single government had existed }{0-41 only a few decades. Prior
to that, this very planet itself was split into a }{-1-91 number of
subplanetary political units."}{ }{-2-101 "Never heard anything like
it." For a while, the supersonics of the various }{-1-81 creatures
interfered with one another.}{ }{-1-51 "It's a fact. It is simply the
nature of the beast."}{ }{-1-71 And with that, they were at the
Secretariat of Defense.}{ }{-1-81 The five Diaboli stood side by side
along the table. They stood because their anatomy did not admit of
anything that could correspond to "sitting."}{ }{-1-71 On the other side
of the table, five Earthmen stood as well. It would have }{-1-81 been
more convenient for the humans to sit but, understandably, there was
}{-2-101 no desire to make the handicap of smaller size any more
pronounced than it }{-1-91 already was. The table was a rather wide one;
the widest, in fact, that could }{-1-71 be conveniently obtained. This
was out of respect for the human nose, for }{-1-51 from the Diaboli,
slightly so as they breathed, much more so when they }{-1-91 spoke,
there came the gentle and continuous drift of hydrogen sulfide. This was
a difficulty rather unprecedented in diplomatic negotiations.}{ }{-1-61
Ordinarily the meetings did not last for more than half an hour, and at
}{-1-91 the end of this interval the Diaboli ended their conversations
without cere-mony and turned to leave. This time, however, the
leave-taking was inter-rupted. A man entered, and the five human
negotiators made way for him. }{-1-71 He was tall, taller than any of
the other Earthmen, and he wore a uniform }{-2-111 with the ease of long
usage. His face was round and his eyes cold and steady. }{-1-81 His
black hair was rather thin but as yet untouched by gray. There was an
irregular blotch of scar tissue running from the point of his jaw
downward past the line of his high, leather-brown collar. It might have
been the result }{-2-111 of a hand energy-ray, wielded by some forgotten
human enemy in one of the }{-1-81 five wars in which the man had been an
active participant.}{ }{-1-91 "Sirs," said the Earthman who had been
chief negotiator hitherto, "may I introduce the Secretary of Defense?"}{
}{-2-111 The Diaboli were somewhat shocked and, although their
expressions were }{-1-81 in repose and inscrutable, the sound plates on
their foreheads vibrated ac-}{-2-101 tively. Their strict sense of
hierarchy was disturbed. The Secretary was only }{-1-71 a Two-leg, but
by Two-leg standards, he outranked them. They could not }{-2-101
properly conduct official business with him.}{ }{-2-101 The Secretary
was aware of their feelings but had no choice in the matter. }{0-41 For
at least ten minutes, their leaving must be delayed and no ordinary
}{-1-81 interruption could serve to hold back the Diaboli.}{ }{-1-81
"Sirs," he said, "I must ask your indulgence to remain longer this
time."}{ }{0-31 The central Diabolus replied in the nearest approach to
English any }{-1-61 Diabolus could manage. Actually, a Diabolus might be
said to have two }{-2-101 mouths. One was hinged at the outermost
extremity of the jawbone and was }{-1-91 used in eating. In this
capacity, the motion of the mouth was rarely seen by }{-1-71 human
beings, since the Diaboli much preferred to eat in the company of
}{-1-91 their own kind, exclusively. A narrower mouth opening, however,
perhaps }{-1-61 two inches in width, coul d be used in speaking. It
pursed itself open, re-}{-1-71 vealing the gummy gap where a Diabolus'
missing incisors ought to have }{-1-91 been. It remained open during
speech, the necessary consonantal blockings }{ -2-101 being performed by
the palate and back of the tongue. The result was hoarse }{-1-91 and
fuzzy, but understandable.}{ }{-1-81 The Diabolus said, "You will pardon
us, already we suffer." And by his }{-1-51 forehead, he twittered
unheard, "They mean to suffocate us in their vile }{-2-101 atmosphere.
We must ask for larger poison-absorbing cylinders."}{ }{0-3192 The
Secretary of Defense said, "I am in sympathy with your feelings, and yet
this may be my only opportunity to speak with you. Perhaps you would
}{192 do us the honor to eat with us."}{ }{0-1192 The Earthman next the
Secretary could not forbear a quick and passing }{0-2192 frown. He
scribbled rapidly on a piece of paper and passed it to the Secre- tary,
who glanced momentarily at it.}{ }{0-3192 It read, "No. They eat
sulfuretted hay. Stinks unbearably." The Secretary }{192 crumbled the
note and let it drop.}{ }{0-4192 The Diabolus said, "The honor is ours.
Were we physically able to endure }{0-1192 your strange atmosphere for
so long a time, we would accept most grate-}{ -1-8192 fully."}{ }{0-1192
And via forehead, he said with agitation, "They cannot expect us to eat
with them and watch them consume the corpses of dead animals. My cud
}{0-2192 would never be sweet again."}{ }{0-1192 "We respect your
reasons," said the Secretary. "Let us then transact our }{0-3192
business now. In the negotiations that have so far proceeded, we have
been }{ 0-2192 unable to obtain from your government, in the persons of
you, their repre-sentatives, any clear indication as to what the
boundaries of your sphere of }{-1-5192 influence are in your own minds.
We have presented several proposals in this }{0-2192 matter."}{ }{0-2192
"As far as the territories of Earth are concerned, Mr. Secretary, a
defini-}{0-1192 tion has been given."}{ }{192 "But surely you must see
that this is unsatisfactory. The boundaries of }{0-3192 Earth and your
lands are nowhere in contact. So far, you have done nothing }{192 but
state this fact. While true, the mere statement is not satisfying."}{
}{192 "We do not completely understand. Would you have us discuss the
boundaries between ourselves and such independent human kingdoms as
}{0-2192 that of Vega?"}{ }{192 "Why, yes."}{ }{0-2192 "That cannot be
done, sir. Surely, you realize that any relations between }{-1-5192
ourselves and the sovereign realm of Vega cannot be possibly any concern
of }{ 0-2192 Earth. They can be discussed only with Vega."}{ }{0-3192
"Then you will negotiate a hundred times with the hundred human world
}{-1-9192 systems?"}{ }{0-3192 "It is necessary. I would point out,
however, that the necessity is imposed }{192 not by us but by the nature
of your human organization."}{ }{192 "Then that limits our field of
discussion drastically." The Secretary seemed abstracted. He was
listening, not exactly to the Diaboli opposite, but, rather, it would
seem, to something at a distance.}{ }{192 And now there was a faint
commotion, barely heard from outside the }{0-1192 Secretariat. The
babble of distant voices, the brisk crackle of energy-guns muted by
distance to nearly nothingness, and the hurried click-clacking of
}{-1-5192 police hoppers.}{ }{0-4192 The Diaboli showed no indication of
hearing, nor was this simply another}{ }{0-1194 affectation of
politeness. If their capacity for receiving supersonic sound }{-1-6194
waves was far more delicate and acute than almost anything human
ingenu-}{ 0-3194 ity had ever invented, their reception for ordinary
sound waves was rather }{-2-12194 dull.}{ }{-1-6194 The Diabolus was
saying, "We beg leave to state our surprise. We were of }{0-2194 the
opinion that all this was known to you."}{ }{0-4194 A man in police
uniform appeared in the doorway. The Secretary turned }{0-3194 to him
-and, with the briefest of nods, the policeman departed.}{ }{-1-6194 The
Secretary said suddenly and briskly, "Quite. I merely wished to
ascer-}{0-1194 tain once again that this was the case. I trust you will
be ready to resume }{ -1-6194 negotiations tomorrow?"}{ }{0-3194
"Certainly, sir."}{ }{0-4194 One by one, slowly, with a dignity
befitting the heirs of the universe, the }{-1-5194 Diaboli left.}{
}{0-1194 An Earthman said, "I'm glad they refused to eat with us."}{
}{0-3194 "I knew they couldn't accept," said the Secretary,
thoughtfully. "They're vegetarian. They sicken thoroughly at the very
thought of eating meat. I've }{-1-5194 seen them eat, you know. Not many
humans have. They resemble our cattle }{194 in the business of eating.
They bolt their food and then stand solemnly }{0-3194 about in circles,
chewing their cuds in a great community of thought. Per-}{194 haps they
intercommunicate by a method we are unaware of. The huge }{-1-5194 lower
jaw rotates h orizontally in a slow, grinding process"}{ }{0-3194 The
policeman had once more appeared in the doorway.}{ }{0-4194 The
Secretary broke off, and called, "You have them all?"}{ }{-1-7194 "Yes,
sir."}{ }{-1-5194 "Do you have Altmayer?"}{ }{-1-7194 "Yes, sir."}{
}{0-3194 "Good."}{ }{0-2194 The crowd had gathered again when the five
Diaboli emerged from the Secretariat. The schedule was strict. At 3:00
}{0-2194 p.m. }{0-2194 each day they left their }{194 suite and spent
five minutes walking to the Secretariat. At 3:35, they }{0-1194 emerged
therefrom once again and returned to their suite, the way being }{
-1-5194 kept clear by the police. They marched stolidly, almost
mechanically, along }{0-4194 the broad avenue.}{ }{0-4194 Halfway in
their trek there came the sounds of shouting men. To most of the crowd,
the words were not clear but there was the crackle of an energy-}{0-2194
gun and the pale blue fluoresce nce split the air overhead. Police
wheeled, }{194 their own energy-guns drawn, hoppers springing seven feet
into the air, }{0-4194 landing delicately in the midst of groups of
people, touching none of them, }{ 194 jumping again almost instantly.
People scattered and their voices were }{0-3194 joined to the general
uproar.}{ }{0-3194 Through it all, the Diaboli, either through defective
hearing or excessive }{0-4194 dignity, continued marching as
mechanically as ever.}{ }{0-41 At the other end of the gathering, almost
diametrically opposing the }{-1-91 region of excitement, Richard Sayama
Altmayer stroked his nose in a mo- ment of satisfaction. The strict
chronology of the Diaboli had made a split-second plan possible. The
first diversionary disturbance was only to attract }{-1-61 the attention
of the police. It was now}{ }{-1-71 And he fired a harmless sound pellet
into the air.}{ }{-1-81 Instantly, from four directions, concussion
pellets split the air. From the }{-1-91 roofs of buildings lining the
way, snipers fired.}{ }{-1-61 Each of the Diaboli, torn by the shells,
shuddered and exploded as the }{-1-71 pellets detonated within them. One
by one, they toppled.}{ }{-2-101 And from nowhere, the police were at
Altmayer's side. He stared at them }{-2-111 with some surprise.}{
}{-1-81 Gently, for in twenty years he had lost his fury and learned to
be gentle, }{-2-101 he said, "You come quickly, but even so you come too
late." He gestured in }{-1-71 the direction of the shattered Diaboli.}{
}{-1-51 The crowd was in simple panic now. Additional squadrons of
police, }{0-41 arriving in record time, could do nothing more than herd
them off into }{-2-111 harmless directions.}{ }{-1-91 The policeman, who
now held Altmayer in a firm grip, taking the sound }{-2-111 gun from him
and inspecting him quickly for further weapons, was a captain }{-1-61 by
rank. He said, stiffly, "I think you've made a mistake, Mr. Altmayer.
}{-2-111 You'll notice you've drawn no blood." And he, too, waved toward
where the }{-2-121 Diaboli lay motionless.}{ }{-1-91 Altmayer turned,
startled. The creatures lay there on their sides, some in }{-1-51
pieces, tattered skin shredding away, frames distorted and bent, but the
}{-1-71 police captain was correct. There was no blood, no flesh.
Altmayer's lips, }{-2-111 pale and stiff, moved soundlessly.}{ }{-1-61
The police captain interpreted the motion accurately enough. He said,
}{-1-81 "You are correct, sir, they are robots."}{ }{-1-71 And from the
great doors of the Secretariat of Defense the true Diaboli }{-1-61
emerged. Clubbing policemen cleared the way, but another way, so that
}{-1-81 they need not pass the sprawled travesties of plastic and
aluminum which for three minutes had played the role of living
creatures.}{ }{-1-71 The police captain said, "I'll ask you to come
without trouble, Mr. Alt-}{-1-91 mayer. The Secretary of Defense would
like to see you."}{ }{-1-51 "I am coming, sir." A stunned frustration
was only now beginning to }{-2-131 overwhelm him.}{ }{-2-101 Geoffrey
Stock and Richard Altmayer faced one another for the first time }{-1-51
in almost a quarter of a century, there in the Defense Secretary's
private }{-1-91 office. It was a rather straitlaced office: a desk, an
armchair, and two addi-}{-1-51 tional chairs. All were a dull brown in
color, the chairs being topped by }{-1-81 brown foamite which yielded to
the body enough for comfort, not enough }{-1-61 for luxury. There was a
micro-viewer on the desk and a little cabinet big}{ }{-1-5193 enough to
hold several dozen opto-spools. On the wall opposite the desk was
}{0-3193 a trimensional view of the old }{0-3193 Dauntless, }{ 0-3193
the Secretary's first command.}{ }{0-4193 Stock said, "It is a little
ridiculous meeting like this after so many years. I }{0-2193 find I am
sorry."}{ }{193 "Sorry about what, Jeff?" Altmayer tried to force a
smile, "I am sorry }{0-1193 about nothing but that you tricked me with
those robots."}{ }{193 "You were not difficult to trick," said Stock,
"and it was an excellent opportunity to break your party. I'm sure it
will be quite discredited after }{0-4193 this. The pacifist tries to
force war; the apostle of gentleness tries assassina-}{0-3193 tion."}{
}{0-3193 "War against the true enemy," said Altmayer sadly. "But you are
right. It is a sign of desperation that this was forced on me." Then,
"How did you }{-1-5193 know my plans?"}{ }{0-1193 "You still
overestimate humanity, Dick. In any conspiracy the weakest }{0-3193
points are the people that compose it. You had twenty-five
co-conspirators. }{193 Didn't it occur to you that at least one of them
might be an informer, or }{0-3193 even an employee of mine?"}{ }{0-3193
A dull red burned slowly on Altmayer's high cheekbones. "Which one?"
}{-1-6193 he said.}{ }{0-2193 "Sorry. We may have to use him again."}{
}{0-2193 Altmayer sat back in his chair wearily. "What have you
gained?"}{ }{0-3193 "What have }{0-3193 you }{0-3193 gained? You are as
impractical now as on that last day I }{0-2193 saw you; the day you
decided to go to jail rather than report for induction. }{0-3193 You
haven't changed."}{ }{0-1193 Altmayer shook his head, "The truth doesn't
change."}{ }{-1-5193 Stock said impatiently, }{16193 "If}{193 }{-1-5193
it is truth, why does it always fail? Your stay in }{0-3193 jail
accomplished nothing. The war went on. Not one life was saved. Since
}{193 then, you've started a political party; and every cause it has
backed has }{0-3193 failed. Your conspiracy has failed. You're nearly
fifty, Dick, and what have }{0-4193 you accomplished? Nothing."}{
}{0-3193 Altmayer said, "And you went to war, rose to command a ship,
then to a }{193 place in the Cabinet. They say you will be the next
Coordinator. You've }{-1-5193 accomplished a great deal. Yet success and
failure do not exist in themselves. }{0-4193 Success in what? Success in
working the ruin of humanity. Failure in what? }{0-1193 In saving it? I
wouldn't change places with you. Jeff, remember this. In a }{0-3193 good
cause, there are no failures; there are only delayed successes."}{
}{0-2193 "Even if you are executed for this day's work?"}{ }{0-2193
"Even if I am executed. There will be someone else to carry on, and his
}{-1-5193 success will be my success."}{ }{-1-5193 "How do you envisage
this success? Can you really see a union of worlds, }{0-2193 a Galactic
Federation? Do you want Santanni running our affairs? Do you }{ 0-3193
want a Vegan telling you what to do? Do you want Earth to decide its own
}{0-1193 destiny or to be at the mercy of any random combination of
powers?"}{ }{193 "We would be at their mercy no more than they would be
at ours."}{ }{190 "Except that we are the richest. We would be plundered
for the sake of the depressed worlds of the Sirius Sector."}{ }{190 "And
pay the plunder out of what we would save in the wars that would no
longer occur."}{ }{190 "Do you have answers for all questions, Dick?"}{
}{190 "In twenty years we have been asked all questions, Jeff."}{ }{190
"Then answer this one. How would you force this union of yours on
}{0-2190 unwilling humanity?"}{ }{190 "That is why I wanted to kill the
Diaboli." For the first time, Altmayer showed agitation. "It would mean
war with them, but all humanity would }{0-1190 unite against the common
enemy. Our own po litical and ideological differ-}{190 ences would fade
in the face of that."}{ }{190 "You really believe that? Even when the
Diaboli have never harmed us? They cannot live on our worlds. They must
remain on their own worlds of }{0-1190 sulfide atmosphere and oceans
which are sodi um sulfate solutions."}{ }{190 "Humanity knows better,
Jeff. They are spreading from world to world like an atomic explosion.
They block space-travel into regions where there }{0-2190 are unoccupied
oxygen worlds, the kind }{ 0-2190 we }{0-2190 could use. They are
planning for }{0-1190 the future; making room for uncounted future
generations of Diaboli, while }{ 0-2190 we are being restricted to one
corner of the Galaxy, and fighting ourselves to death. In a thousand
years we will be their slaves; in ten thousand we will be }{190 extinct.
Oh, yes, they are the common enemy. Mankind knows that. You will find
that out sooner than you think, perhaps."}{ }{190 The Secretary said,
"Your party members speak a great deal of ancient }{0-1190 Greece of the
preatomic age. They tell us that the Greeks were a marvelous }{190
people, the most culturally advanced of their time, perhaps of all
times. They set mankind on the road it has never yet left entirely. They
had only one flaw. They could not unite. They were conquered and
eventually died out. And we follow in their footsteps now, eh?"}{
}{0-2190 "You have learned your lesson well, Jeff."}{ }{190 "But have
you, Dick?"}{ }{190 "What do you mean?"}{ }{190 "Did the Greeks have no
common enemy against whom they could }{0-3190 unite?"}{ }{0-2190
Altmayer was silent.}{ }{190 Stock said, "The Greeks fought Persia,
their great common enemy. Was }{0-1190 it not a fact that a good
proportion of the Greek states fought on the Persian }{-1-7190 side?"}{

}{190 Altmayer said finally, "Yes. Because they thought Persian victory
was inevitable and they wanted to be on the winning side."}{ }{0-1190
"Human beings haven't changed, Dick. Why do you suppose the Diaboli
}{190 are here? What is it we are discussing?"}{ }{190 "I am not a
member of the government."}{ }{-2-101 "No," said Stock, savagely, "but I
am. The Vegan League has allied itself }{-1-71 with the Diaboli."}{
}{-1-51 "I don't believe you. It can't be."}{ }{0-31 "It can be and is.
The Diaboli have agreed to supply them with five }{-1-61 hundred ships
at any time they happen to be at war with Earth. In return, }{-1-81 Vega
abandons all claims to the Nigellian star cluster. So if you had really
}{-1-91 assassinated the Diaboli, it would have been war, but with half
of humanity }{-1-51 probably fi ghting on the side of your so-called
common enemy. We are }{-1-61 trying to prevent that."}{ }{0-21 Altmayer
said slowly, "I am ready for trial. Or am I to be executed }{-2-101
without one?"}{ }{-2-121 Stock said, "You are still foolish. If we shoot
you, Dick, we make a martyr. }{-2-111 If we keep you alive and shoot
only your subordinates, you will be suspected }{-1-71 of having turned
state's evidence. As a presumed traitor, you will be quite harmless in
the future."}{ }{-1-61 And so, on September 5th, 2788, Richard Sayama
Altmayer, after the }{-1-91 briefest of secret trials, was sentenced to
five years in prison. He served his }{-1-61 full term. The year he
emerged from prison, Geoffrey Stock was elected }{-1-81 Coordinator of
Earth.}{ }{-2-131 3}{-2-131 December 21, 2800}{ }{-2-111 Simon Devoire
was not at ease. He was a little man, with sandy hair and a }{-1-71
freckled, ruddy face. He said, "I'm sorry I agreed to see you, Altmayer.
It won't do you any good. It might do me harm."}{ }{-1-91 Altmayer said,
"I am an old man. I won't hurt you." And he was indeed a }{0-41 very old
man somehow. The turn of the century found his years at two }{0-11
thirds o f a century, but he was older than that, older inside and older
}{-2-111 outside. His clothes were too big for him, as if he were
shrinking away inside }{-1-61 them. Only his nose had not aged; it was
still the thin, aristocratic, high-}{-2-121 beaked Altmayer nose.}{
}{-1-61 Devoire said, "It's not you I'm afraid of." }{-1-71 "Why not?
Perhaps you think I betrayed the men of "88." }{-1-81 "No, of course
not. No man of sense believes that you did. But the days }{ -1-91 of the
Federalists are over, Altmayer."}{ }{-1-71 Altmayer tried to smile. He
felt a little hungry; he hadn't eaten that day }{-2-101 no time for
food. Was the day of the Federalists over? It might seem so to }{-1-61
others. The movement had died on a wave of ridicule. A conspiracy that
}{-1-81 fails, a "lost cause," is often romantic. It is remembered and
draws adher-}{-1-51 ents for generations, }{-1-51 if }{ -1-51 the loss
is at least a dignified one. But to shoot at }{-1-71 living creatures
and find the mark to be robots; to be outmaneuvered and }{-1-81
outfoxed; to be made ridiculous that is deadly. It is deadlier than
treason, }{-1-91 wrong, and sin. Not many had believed Altmayer had
bargained for his life }{-1-81 by betraying his associates, but the
universal laughter killed Federalism as }{ -1-91 effectively as though
they had.}{ }{-1-91 But Altmayer had remained stolidly stubborn under it
all. He said, "The }{-1-81 day of the Federalists will never be over,
while the human race lives."}{ }{-2-101 "Words," said Devoire
impatiently. "They meant more to me when I was }{-1-71 younger. I am a
little tired now."}{ }{-1-81 "Simon, I need access to the subetheric
system."}{ }{-1-61 Devoire's face hardened. He said, "And you thought of
me. I'm sorry, }{-1-81 Altmayer, but I can't let you use my broadcasts
for your own purposes."}{ }{-2-101 "You were a Federalist once."}{
}{0-21 "Don't rely on that," said Devoire. "That's in the past. Now I
am}{-1-71 nothing. I am a Devoirist, I suppose. I want to live."}{
}{-1-51 "Even if it is under the feet of the Diaboli? Do you want to
live when }{-1-91 they are willing; die when they are ready?"}{ }{-2-141
"Words!"}{ }{-1-91 "Do you approve of the all-Galactic conference?"}{
}{-1-91 * Devoire reddened past his usual pink level. He gave the sudden
impres-}{-1-51 sion of a man with too much blood for his body. H e said
smolderingly, "Well, why not? What does it matter how we go about
establishing the }{-2-101 Federation of Man? If you're still a
Federalist, what have you to object to in }{-1-81 a united humanity?"}{
}{-1-71 "United under the Diaboli?"}{ }{-1-81 "What's the difference?
Humanity can't unite by itself. Let us be driven }{-2-101 to it, as long
as the fact is accomplished. I am sick of it all, Altmayer, sick of
}{-1-91 all our stupid history. I'm tired of trying to be an idealist
with nothing to be idealistic over. Human beings are human beings and
that's the nasty part of }{-1-71 it. Maybe we've }{-1-71 got }{-1-71 to
be whipped into line. If so, I'm perfectly willing to let the Diaboli do
the whipping."}{ }{-1-61 Altmayer said gently, "You're very foolish,
Devoire. It won't be a real }{-2-101 union, you know that. The Diaboli
called this conference so that they might }{-1-71 act as umpires on all
current interhuman disputes to their own advantage, }{-2-111 and remain
the supreme court of judgment over us hereafter. You know they }{-1-81
have no intention of establishing a real central human government. It
will }{-1-51 only be a sort of interlocking directorate; each human
government will }{-2-111 conduct its own affairs as before and pull in
various directions as before. It is }{-1-61 simply that we will grow
accustomed to running to the Diaboli with our }{-1-91 little
problems."}{ }{-1-81 "How do you know that will be the result?"}{
}{-1-91 "Do you seriously think any other result is possible?"}{ }{-1-81
Devoire chewed at his lower lip, "Maybe not!"}{ }{-1-61 "Then see
through a pane of glass, Simon. Any true independence we }{-2-101 now
have will be lost."}{ }{-2-101 "A lot of good this independence has ever
done us. Besides, what's the }{-1-81 use? We can't stop this thing.
Coordinator Stock is probably no keener on }{0-41 the conference than
you are, but that doesn't help him. If Earth doesn't }{-2-101 attend,
the union will be formed without us, and then we .will face war with}{
}{190 the rest of humanity and the Diaboli. And that goes for any other
govern-ment that wants to back out."}{ }{190 "What if }{190 all }{190
the governments back out? Wouldn't the conference break }{0-2190 up
completely?"}{ }{190 "Have you ever known all the human governments to
do }{190 anything }{190 to-}{0-2190 gether? You never learn,
Altmayer."}{ }{190 "There are new facts involved."}{ }{190 "Such as? I
know I am foolish for asking, but go ahead."}{ }{190 Altmayer said, "For
twenty years most of the Galaxy has been shut to human ships. You know
that. None of us has the slightest notion of what }{0-1190 goes on
within the Diaboli sphere of influence. And yet some human colo-}{190
nies exist within that sphere."}{ }{-1-5190 "So?"}{ }{0-1190 "So
occasionally, human beings escape into the small portion of the
Gal-}{190 axy that remains human and free. The government of Earth
receives re-}{0-1190 ports ; reports which they don't dare make public.
But not }{0-1190 all }{0-1190 officials of the }{190 government can
stand the cowardice involved in such actions forever. One of them has
been to see me. I can't tell you which one, of courseSo I }{0-1190 have
documents, Devoire; official, reliable, and true."}{ }{190 Devoire
shrugged, "About what?" He turned the desk chronometer rather
ostentatiously so that Altmayer could see its gleaming metal face on
}{0-2190 which the red, glowing figures stood out sharply. They read
22:31, and even }{190 as it was turned, the 1 faded and the new glow of
a 2 appeared.}{ }{190 Altmayer said, "There is a planet called by its
colonists Chu Hsi. It did not have a large population; two million,
perhaps. Fifteen years ago the }{0-2190 Diaboli occupied worlds on
various sides of it; and in all those fifteen years, }{190 no human ship
ever landed on the planet. Last year the Diaboli themselves landed. They
brought with them huge freight ships filled with sodium sul-fate and
bacterial cultures that are native to their own worlds."}{ }{190 "What?
You can't make me believe it."}{ }{190 "Try," said Altmayer, ironically.
"It is not difficult. Sodium sulfate will dissolve in the oceans of any
world. In a sulfate ocean, their bacteria will grow, multiply, and
produce hydrogen sulfide in tremendous quantities }{ 0-1190 which will
fill the oceans and the atmosphere. They can then introduce their }{190
plants and animals and eventually themselves. Another planet will be
suit-able for Diaboli life and unsuitable for any human. It would take
time, surely, but the Diaboli have time. They are a united people and .
. ."}{ }{190 "Now, look," Devoire waved his hand in disgust, "that just
doesn't hold water. The Diaboli have more worlds than they know what to
do with."}{ }{190 "For their present purposes, yes, but the Diaboli are
creatures that look toward the future. Their bi rth rate is high and
eventually they will fill the Galaxy. And how much better off they would
be if they were the only intelligence in the universe."}{ }{0-1190 "But
it's impossible on purely physical grounds. Do you know how many}{
}{-1-91 millions of tons of sodium sulfate it would take to fill up the
oceans to their }{-2-111 requirements?"}{ }{-2-101 "Obviously a
planetary supply."}{ }{-1-91 "Well, then, do you suppose they would
strip one of their own worlds to }{-1-71 create a new one? Where is the
gain?"}{ }{-2-111 "Simon, Simon, there are millions of planets in the
Galaxy which through }{-1-71 atmospheric conditions, temperature, or
gravity are forever uninhabitable }{-1-81 either to humans or to
Diaboli. Many of these are quite adequately rich in }{-2-121 sulfur."}{
}{-1-71 Devoire considered, "What about the human beings on the
planet?"}{ }{-1-51 "On Chu Hsi? Euthanasiaexcept for the few who escaped
in time. }{-1-91 Painless I suppose. The Diaboli are not needlessly
cruel, merely efficient."}{ }{-1-91 Altmayer waited. Devoire's fist
clenched and unclenched.}{ }{0-11 Altmayer said, "Publish this news.
Spread it out on the interstellar }{-1-61 subetheric web. Broadcast the
documents to the reception centers on the }{-2-101 various worlds. You
can do it, and when you do, the all-Galactic conference }{-1-81 will
fall apart."}{ }{-1-81 i Devoire's chair tilted forward. He stood up.
"Where's your proof?" }{0-41 a "Will you do it?" }{-2-111 <> ,"I want to
see your proof." }{-1-81 I Altmayer smiled, "Come with me."}{ }{-1-91
They were waiting for him when he came back to the furnished room he was
living in. He didn't notice them at first. He was completely unaware of
}{-1-81 the small vehicle that followed him at a slow pa ce and a
prudent distance. He walked with his head bent, calculating the length
of time it would take }{-2-101 for Devoire to put the information
through the reaches of space; how long it }{-1-81 would take for the
receiving stations on Vega and Santanni and Centaurus }{-1-51 to blast
out the news; how long it would take to spread it over the entire }{0-41
Galaxy. And in this way he passed, unheeding, between the two
plain-}{-1-81 clothes men who flanked the entrance of the rooming
house.}{ }{-1-61 It was only when he opened the door to his own room
that he stopped and turned to leave but the plain-clothes men were
behind him now. He }{-1-51 made no attempt at violent escape. He entered
the room instead and sat }{-1-71 down, feeling so old. He thought
feverishly, I need only hold them off an hour and ten minutes.}{ }{-1-71
The man who occupied the darkness reached up and flicked the switch
}{0-41 that allowed the wall lights to operate. In the soft wall glow,
the man's }{-2-101 round face and balding gray-fringed head were
startlingly clear.}{ }{0-41 Altmayer said gently, "I am honored with a
visit by the Coordinator }{-2-131 himself."}{ }{-1-61 And Stock said,
"We are old friends, you and I, Dick. We meet every }{-1-71 once in a
while."}{ }{-2-101 Altmayer did not answer.}{ }{0-1195 Stock said, "You
have certain government papers in your possession, }{-1-8195 Dick."}{
}{0-3195 Altmayer said, "If you think so, Jeff, you'll have to find
them."}{ }{0-2195 Stock rose wearily to his feet. "No heroics, Dick. Let
me tell you what }{-1-5195 those papers contained. They were
circumstantial reports of the sulfation of }{195 the planet, Chu Hsi.
Isn't that true?"}{ }{-1-5195 Altmayer looked at the clock.}{ }{-1-6195
Stock said, "If you are pknning to delay us, to angle us as though we
were }{195 fish, you will be disappointed. We know where you've been, we
know }{0-1195 Devoire has the papers, we know exactly what he's planning
to do with }{0-2195 them."}{ }{0-4195 Altmayer stiffened. The thin
parchment of his cheeks trembled. He said, }{-1-6195 "How long have you
known?"}{ }{-1-6195 "As long as you have, Dick. You are a very
predictable man. It is the very }{0-3195 reason we decided to use you.
Do you suppose the Recorder would really }{ 0-4195 come to see you as he
did, without our knowledge?"}{ }{0-1195 "I don't understand."}{ }{0-4195
Stock said, "The Government of Earth, Dick, is not anxious that the
all-}{195 Galactic conference be continued. However, we are not
Federalists; we }{0-2195 know humanity for what it is. What do you
suppose would happen if the }{-1-6195 rest of the Galaxy discovered that
the Diaboli were in the process of chang-ing a salt-oxygen world into a
sulfate-sulfide one?}{ }{0-1195 "No, don't answer. You are Dick Altmayer
and I'm sure you'd tell me }{-1-5195 that with one fiery burst of
indignation, they'd abandon the conference, join }{ 0-3195 together in a
loving and brotherly union, throw themselves at the Diaboli, }{0-4195
and overwhelm them."}{ }{0-3195 Stock paused such a long time that for a
moment it might have seemed }{0-2195 he would say no more. Then he
continued in half a whisper, "Nonsense. }{0-3195 The other worlds would
say that the Government of Earth for purposes of }{0-4195 its own had
initiated a fraud, had forged documents in a deliberate attempt
}{-1-5195 to disrupt the conference. The Diaboli would deny everything,
and most of the human worlds would find it to their interests to believe
the denial. They }{0-4195 would concentrate on the iniquities of Earth
and forget about the iniquities of the Diaboli. So you see, we could
sponsor no such expose."}{ }{0-2195 Altmayer felt drained, futile. "Then
you will stop Devoire. It is always }{-1-6195 that you are so sure of
failure beforehand; that you believe the worst of your }{ -1-8195 fellow
man"}{ }{0-2195 "Wait! I said nothing of stopping Devoire. I said only
that the govern-}{-1-6195 ment could not sponsor such an expose and we
will not. But the expose will }{ 0-3195 take place just the same, except
that afterward we will arrest Devoire and yourself and denounce the
whole thing as vehemently as will the Diaboli. }{0-1195 The whole affair
would then be changed. The Government of Earth will }{0-3195 have
dissociated itself from the claims. It will then seem to the rest of the
}{0-4195 human government that f or our own selfish purposes we are
trying to hide}{ }{-1-71 the actions of the Diaboli, that we have,
perhaps, a special understanding with them. They will fear that special
understanding and unite against us. But }{-1-71 then }{-1-71 to be
against us will mean that they are also against the Diaboli. }{-1-91
They will insist on believing the expose to be the truth, the documents
to be }{-1-81 realand the conference will break up."}{ }{-1-91 "It will
mean war again," said Altmayer hopelessly, "and not against the }{-1-71
real enemy. It will mean fighting among the humans and a victory all the
greater for the Diaboli when it is all over."}{ }{-2-101 "No war," said
Stock. "No government will attack Earth with the Diaboli }{-1-61 on our
side. The other governments will merely draw away from us and grind a
permanent anti-Diaboli bias into their propaganda. Later, if there
}{-1-71 should be war between ourselves and the Diaboli, the other
governments will at least remain neutral."}{ }{-1-91 He looks very old,
thought Altmayer. We are all old, dying men. Aloud, }{-1-81 he said,
"Why would you expect the Diaboli to bac k Earth? You may fool the rest
of mankind by pretending to attempt suppression of the facts con-cerning
the planet Chu Hsi, but you won't fool the Diaboli. They won't for a
moment believe Earth to be sincere in its claim that it believes the
docu- ments to be forgeries."}{ }{-1-71 "Ah, but they will." Geoffrey
Stock stood up, "You see, the documents }{-2-101 are }{-2-101 forgeries.
The Diaboli may be planning sulfation of planets in the future, }{-1-61
but to our knowledge, they have not tried it yet."}{ }{-2-101 On
December 21, 2800, Richard Sayama Altmayer entered prison for the
}{-1-81 third and last time. There was no trial, no definite sentence,
and scarcely a }{-1-51 real imprisonment in the literal sense of the
word. His movements were }{-1-81 confined and only a few officials were
allowed to communicate with him, }{-1-91 but oth erwise his comforts
were looked to assiduously. He had no access to }{-1-51 news, of course,
so that he was not aware that in the second year of this }{-1-71 third
imprisonment of his, the war between Earth and the Diaboli opened
}{-1-91 with the surprise attack near Sirius by an Earth squadron upon
certain ships of the Diaboli navy.}{ }{-2-101 In 2802, Geoffrey Stock
came to visit Altmayer in his confinement. Alt-}{-1-81 mayer rose in
surprise to greet him.}{ }{-2-101 "You're looking well, Dick," Stock
said.}{ }{-1-91 He himself was not. His complexion had grayed. He still
wore his naval }{-1-51 captain's uniform, but his body stooped slightly
within it. He was to die }{-1-81 within the year, a fact of which he was
not completely unaware. It did not bother him much. He thought
repeatedly, I have lived the years I've had to }{-3-171 live.}{ }{-1-91
Altmayer, who looked the older of the two, had yet more than nine years
to live. He said, "An unexpected pleasure, Jeff, but this time you can't
have }{-1-71 come to imprison me. I'm in prison already."}{ }{191 "I've
come to set you free, if you would like."}{ }{-1-5191 "For what purpose,
Jeff? Surely you have a purpose? A clever way of using }{-1-7191 me?"}{
}{0-1191 Stock's smile was merely a momentary twitch. He said, "A way of
using }{191 you, truly, but this time you will approve. . . . We are at
war."}{ }{0-1191 "With whom?" Altmayer was startled.}{ }{191 "With the
Diaboli. We have been at war for six months."}{ }{0-1191 Altmayer
brought his hands together, thin fingers interlacing nervously, }{191
"I've heard nothing of this."}{ }{191 "I know." The Coordinator clasped
his hands behind his back and was distantly surprised to find that they
were trembling. He said, "It's been a }{0-2191 long journey for the two
of us, Dick. We've had the same goal, you and INo, let me speak. I've
often wanted to explain my point of view to you, but }{0-1191 you would
never have understood. You weren't the kind of man to under-}{0-3191
stand, until I had the results for you. I was twenty-five when I first
visited }{191 a Diaboli world, Dick. I knew then it was either they or
we."}{ }{191 "I said so," whispered Altmayer, "from the first."}{
}{0-2191 "Merely saying so was not enough. You wanted to force the human
gov-}{191 ernments to unite against them and that notion was politically
unrealistic and completely impossible. It wasn't even desirable. Humans
are not }{-1-5191 Diaboli. Among the Diaboli individual consciousness is
low, almost nonexis-}{ 0-1191 tent. Ours is almost overpowering. They
have no such thing as politics; we }{191 have nothing else. They can
never disagree, can have nothing but a single government. We can never
agree; if we had a single island to live on, we would split it in
three.}{ }{-2-131 "But our very disagreements are our strength! }{-2-131
Your Federalist party used to }{-1-61 speak of ancient Greece a great
deal once. Do you remember? But your }{-1-81 people always missed the
point. To be sure, Greece could never unite and was therefore ultimately
conquered. But even in her state of disunion, she defeated the gigantic
Persian Empire. Why?}{ }{-1-61 "I would like to point out that the Greek
city-states over centuries had }{-2-101 fought with one another. They
were forced to specialize in things military to }{-1-61 an extent far
beyond the Persians. Even the Persians themselves realized }{-1-81 that,
and in the last century of their imperial existence, Greek mercenaries
formed the most valued parts of their armies.}{ }{-1-91 "The same might
be said of the small nation-states of preatomic Europe, }{-1-81 which in
centuries of fighting had advanced their military arts to the point
}{-1-91 where they could overcome and hold for two hundred years the
compara-}{-2-111 tively gigantic empires of Asia.}{ }{-1-71 "So it is
with us. The Diaboli, with vast extents of galactic space, have }{-1-81
never fought a war. Their military machine is massive, but untried. In
fifty }{-2-121 years, only such advances have been made by them as they
have been able to }{-1-51 copy from the various human navies. Humanity,
on the other hand, has }{-2-101 competed ferociously in warfare, Each
government has raced to keep ahead}{ }{-2-101 of its neighbors in
military science. They've had to! It was our own disunion }{-1-81 that
made the terrible race for survival necessary, so that in the end almost
}{-1-91 any one of us was a match for all the Diaboli, provided only
that none of us }{-1-81 would fight on their side in a general war.}{
}{-1-71 "It was toward the prevention of such a development that all of
Earth's }{-1-91 diplomacy has been aimed. Until it was certain that in a
war between Earth }{-1-81 and the Diaboli, the rest of humanity would be
at least neutral, there could }{-2-101 be no war, and no union of human
governments could be allowed, since the race for military perfection
must continue. Once we were sure of neutrality, through the hoax that
broke up the conference two years ago, we sought the }{-1-81 war, and
now we have it."}{ }{-1-61 Altmayer, through all this, might have been
frozen. It was a long time }{-1-91 before he could say anything.}{
}{-1-71 Finally, "What if the Diaboli are victorious after all?"}{
}{-1-71 Stock said, "They aren't. Two weeks ago, the main fleets joined
action }{-2-101 and theirs was annihilated with practically no loss to
ourselves, although we }{-1-71 were greatly outnumbered. We might have
been fighting unarmed ships. }{-1-91 We had stronger weapons of greater
range and more accurate sighting. We }{-1-81 had three times their
effective speed since we had antiacceleration devices }{-1-61 which they
lacked. Since the battle a dozen of the other human govern-}{-1-81 ments
have decided to join the winning side and have declared war on the
}{-1-91 Diaboli. Yesterday the Diaboli requested that negotiations for
an armistice }{-2-111 be opened. The war is practically over; and
henceforward the Diaboli will be }{-1-61 confined to their original
planets with only such future expansions as we }{-2-101 permit."}{
}{-2-111 Altmayer murmured incoherently.}{ }{-2-111 Stock said, "And now
union becomes necessary. After the defeat of Persia }{-1-81 by the Greek
city-states, they were ruined because of their continued wars }{-1-91
among themselves, so that first Macedon and then Rome conquered them.
}{-2-101 After Europe colonized the Americas, cut up Africa, and
conquered Asia, a }{-1-81 series of continued European wars led to
European ruin.}{

}{-1-71 "Disunion until conquest; union thereafter! But now union is
easy. Let }{-1-91 one subdivision succeed by itself and the rest will
clamor to become part of }{-1-71 that success. The ancient writer,
Toynbee, first pointed out this difference between what he called a
'dominant minority' and a 'creative minority.'}{ }{-2-101 "We are a
creative minority now. In an almost spontaneous gesture, vari-}{-1-91
ous human governments have suggested the formation of a United Worlds
organization. Over seventy governments are willing to attend the first
ses-sions in order to draw up a Charter of Feder ation. The others will
join later, I am sure. We would like you to be one of the delegates from
Earth, Dick."}{ }{-2-111 Altmayer found his eyes flooding, "II don't
understand your purpose. Is }{-1-81 this all true?"}{ }{-2-101 "It is
all exactly as I say. You were a voice in the wilderness, Dick,
crying}{0-1189 for union. Your words will carry much weight. What did
you once say: 'In a }{189 good cause, there are no failures.' "}{ }{189
"No!" said Altmayer, with sudden energy. "It seems your cause was the
}{0-1189 good one."}{ }{0-1189 Stock's face was hard and devoid of
emotion, "You were always a misun-}{189 derstander of human nature,
Dick. When the United Worlds is a reality and }{0-2189 when generations
of men and women look back to these days of war through }{189 their
centuries of unbroken peace, they will have forgotten the purpose of my
methods. To them they will represent war and death. }{189 Your }{ 189
calls for }{0-1189 union, }{0-1189 your }{0-1189 idealism, will be
remembered forever."}{ }{189 He turned away and Altmayer barely caught
his last words: "And when they build their statues, they will build none
for me."}{ }{-2-121 In the Great Court, which stands as a patch of
untouched peace among the }{-1-91 fifty busy square miles devoted to the
towering buildings that are the pulse }{-1-61 beat of the United Worlds
of the Galaxy, stands a statue . . .}{ }00000 {-2-101 }{ }}
