{11252030813081{} 411421033020 Invader - Isaac Asimov's Robots In Time -
William F WuDont miss the first five books in Isaac Asimovs Robots In
TimePREDATORThe robot called Hunters first target is hiding somewhere in
the age of dinosaurs. He must catch a robot forced to fight for
survival'85a robot turned Predator.MARAUDERHunters second mission sends
his team to an age of pirates and cutthroats. Their target is a robot
determined to survive'85a robot branded Marauder.WARRIORIn the chaos of
the Roman Empires collapse, Hunter and his team search for a robot who
will risk all of history to escape them'85a robot Warrior.DICTATORIn the
midst of the Second World War, Hunter and his team must outwit Nazi
soldiers and Soviet agents to accomplish their mission'85in the time of
the Dictator.EMPERORHunter and his team chase their prey to ancient
China during the reign of Kubla Khan'85Chinas greatest Emperor.ISAAC
ASIMOVSROBOTSIN TIMEbyWILLIAM F. WUTHE LAWS OF ROBOTICS1.A robot may not
injure a human being, or through inaction, allow a human being to come
to harm.2.A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings, except
where such orders would conflict with the First Law.3.A robot must
protect its own existence, as long as such protection does not conflict
with the First or Second Law.ISAAC ASIMOVSROBOTSIN TIMEINVADERWILLIAM F.
WUCopyright 'a9 1994Databank by Matt ElsonThis novel is dedicated to the
memory of my maternal grandmother,Mae Franking,Who passed her English
and Scottish descent to me and became the first novelist in the
family.Special thanks are due during the time of writing this novel to
Dr. William Q. Wu and Cecile F. Wu, my parents, for indulging my
lifelong interest in history; Riucia Mainhardt; Bridgett and Marty
Marquardt; Michael D. Toman; and John Betancourt, Leigh Grossman, Keith
R. A. DeCandido, and Byron Preiss.1R. Hunter, a humaniform robot, waited
as Steve Chang looked up at him angrily. They stood in the small office
of Mojave Center Governor, in the underground city of Mojave Center.
Steve began to pace.I hardly slept at all, Hunter,Steve growled. Jane
could be anywhere in the world, at any time in history. Thats the
toughest kidnapping to solve anyone could imagine. We have to start
looking for her. Once we get going, Ill get back to normal.You know that
R. Ishihara cannot allow her to be harmed under the First Law of
Robotics,said Hunter. That will not change, no matter where they are.I
know, I know-A robot may not injure a human being, or, through inaction,
allow a human being to come to harm,Steve droned impatiently. But
Ishihara is working for Wayne Nystrom, renegade roboticist,said Steve.
That tells us how great Ishiharas judgment must be. I dont trust him to
follow the First Law responsibly.Dr. Nystrom apparently convinced
Ishihara to help him under the First Law,said Hunter. Once he had done
that, Ishihara had no choice but to obey him under the Second Law.
However, Ishihara will protect both Jane and Dr. Nystrom from immediate
harm.So who cares if the Second Law of Robotics says, A robot must obey
the orders given it by human beings except where such orders would
conflict with the First Law,if the human giving orders cant be trusted?I
do not predict that Jane will be with them long,said Hunter. Wayne
Nystrom will be searching for MC 6 in the same time and place we will.
That narrows the search for Jane considerably. Our search for MC 6 will
take us to them.Well, we know about when and where to find them,
then,said Steve. So lets go!Not so fast.Hunter turned and eased his body
into the desk chair.Why not?We must prepare this mission with the same
care we used in the others. Since we are going back to fifth-century
Britain, I will retain my present appearance. It is consistent with the
gene pool of the local people we will meet.A brawny six feet six inches
tall with short blond hair and blue eyes, Hunter had been designed with
the ability to change his shape and appearance at will.All right, fine.
Thats your department; it wont matter to me. What else do we have to
do?Steve put both fists on his hips and glared at Hunter. Ive already
taken the vaccines you arranged this morning. I assume youve prepared
period clothing, just as you did before.Yes. I took the clothing to the
Bohung Institute while you were trying to sleep. However, I have hired
Harriet Lane, a new historian, to join us.Well, where is she?She is due
here in a few minutes; I arranged for her to receive her vaccines from
R. Cushing, the medical robot who tended your head injury after our
fourth mission. Together, we will have to decide how to explain your
Chinese descent to Britons who have never heard of China or seen anyone
of your race and ethnicity.Well, we told the ancient Germans in Roman
times that I was a slave from the eastern Mediterranean. That should be
good enough.Perhaps. My internal clock says the time is 7:38 P.M. While
we wait for Harriet, I must report to the Governor Robot Oversight
Committee.All right, Ill shut up.Steve folded his arms across his chest
and continued pacing anxiously. I just hope she shows up soon.Nodding,
Hunter called the city computer and instructed it to contact the four
members of the Governor Robot Oversight Committee for him. Then he
waited while they were located for the conference call. In front of him,
Steve still stomped back and forth across the small room.Hunter could
not avoid making reports to the Oversight Committee. He had been
designed and built specifically for the committee in order to search for
Mojave Center Governor, one of six experimental gestalt robots who were
supposed to be running certain cities. All the other Governor robots had
mysteriously shut themselves down. However, MC Governor had suddenly
divided into the six component gestalt humaniform robots out of which he
was comprised and vanished. No one knew why.Dr. Wayne Nystrom, an
eccentric roboticist, had designed and built the Governor robots.
However, the Governor Robot Oversight Committee had been studying their
performance and judging their efficiency. When the Governors began to
fail, Wayne Nystrom had apparently felt that his career was in danger.
He had been trying to beat Hunter to each of the component robots of MC
Governor in order to dismantle and examine them for the mysterious flaw
that had shut down the first five Governors before Hunter could
reassemble MC Governor and turn him over to the Oversight Committee to
complete their study.When Hunter had arrived in Mojave Center, he had
learned that MC Governor had modified an existing piece of technology in
the Bohung Institute into a time travel device. Then each of his
component robots had miniaturized themselves to microscopic size and
fled back in time to a different era, intending to hide forever. Jane
believed their motivation was the Third Law of Robotics, A robot must
protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict
with the First or Second Law.Unknown to them, however, a flaw in the
miniaturization caused each of them to return to full size at different
times, wherever they happened to be.At that point, they had to
masquerade as human. Two dangers presented themselves as a result. The
first was that they could alter the direction of history by living
throughout the centuries and causing people to act in different ways,
driven by the Three Laws of Robotics. Hunter had to prevent that in
order to avoid harm to all humans by having the timeline of history
significantly changed.In addition, when the component robots or their
material remains reached the approximate time they had left, they
exploded with nuclear force. As Hunter prepared to go back with his team
to find MC 6, he also was monitoring the news broadcasts of a mysterious
nuclear explosion in south-central England. Only his team members knew
that it had been caused by MC 6 exploding.Now Wayne had a robot named R.
Ishihara helping him. Originally, Hunter had instructed Ishihara to
apprehend Wayne if he returned from the past to the time travel sphere
in Room F-12 of the Bohung Institute. Somehow, the roboticist had used
an argument involving the Three Laws of Robotics to induce Ishihara to
cooperate with him.On five separate missions, Hunter had led his team of
humans in pursuit of the other five component robots. All five had been
caught. Now they were here in the office of MC Governor, where they
stood merged and shut down, waiting for the last component robot in
order to complete MC Governor again. Once he had been put back together,
the Oversight Committee would investigate why the other Governors had
shut down and why MC Governor had divided and fled.Hunter had reported
to the Governor Robot Oversight Committee on his progress after each
mission. However, he felt that the existence of time travel held
incalculable potential harm for all humans. For that reason, he had kept
it a secret from all except the humans and robots whose help he
required.Certainly if the scientists on the Oversight committee learned
of the time travel, it would never remain a secret. The discovery would
be too valuable for a committee of scientists to ignore. Wayne Nystrom
had discovered MC Governors development of time travel on his own,
before Hunter had learned of it. Hunter could not do anything about
that.Hunter, city computer calling. The Governor Robot Oversight
Committee is ready for your conference call.Thank you. Please connect
me.As before, the faces of the four committee members appeared on
Hunters internal video screen in split portrait shots from their various
locations. Everyone exchanged greetings. Then Hunter began his
report.The first five component robots are in custody and merged,said
Hunter.Thats great,said Dr. Redfield, the tall blonde. I suppose this
has been an easy assignment for you. You began less than two weeks ago.I
must repeat once again that past success does not predict the difficulty
of the final mission,said Hunter. As always, I cannot promise that the
remainder of my work will be completed within a similar period of
time.Where did this mission take place?Dr. Chin asked. Previously, you
have reported quite a wide range of locations around the world.In
northern China,said Hunter. On the border of Mongolia.He remained
deliberately vague in his reports. So far, his reserve had forestalled
persistent questioning from the committee members.Northern
China.Professor Post nodded, idly stroking his black beard for a moment.
Well, thats interesting. Do you have a lead on MC 6?I must investigate
the British Isles,said Hunter. This is preliminary information.Which
one?Dr. Chin asked.I shall begin in England. On previous missions, a
certain amount of travel has been involved.Wait a minute,said Dr. Chin.
Havent you heard about the big explosion? Wont that interfere with your
search?I will take it into account as I make my plans,said Hunter.Do you
think MC 6 may have been destroyed in the explosion?Professor Post asked
calmly.It is an inescapable consideration,said Hunter. However, I can
only proceed and find what i may.I am not surprised,said Dr. Khanna, in
his Hindi accent. However, your work has been completed very quickly to
date. We are all impressed.I must repeat that I can make no guarantee of
my schedule to come,said Hunter.Yes, I heard you the first time,said Dr.
Khanna, with a trace of annoyance in his tone. You repeat that warning
in every report. However, you continue to complete each mission in the
same length of time. What would make this final mission any
different?The explosion, and its after-effects,said Dr. Redfield. He may
have a harder time now.My original point remains valid,said Hunter. I
have no prediction about the challenges that my team will face. Anything
can happen.Hunter realized that he had made a mistake. Before, he had
never told the committee members that he was going to an area where a
nuclear explosion had occurred.We note your caution,said Dr. Chin. And
as always, we wish you good luck.That will be fine, Hunter,said Dr.
Redfield. I suggest we allow you to get to work.Thank you,said Hunter. I
am ready to begin. Do you have any final questions?No one did.Good
luck,said Dr. Chin.Thank you. Good-bye.Hunter broke the connection and
turned to Steve, speaking aloud. Report completed.Good!Steve glanced
impatiently at the closed door of the office. So wheres our historian?I
expect her at any time.All right, all right. What do we do in the
meantime? Do we know what MC 6s specialty was, within MC Governors
responsibilities? Jane always seemed to think that was important.I have
that information,said Hunter. The data the committee originally gave me
about MC Governor provides the original divisions of expertise among the
gestalt robots. Since Jane correctly identified the specialties of the
first five component robots, I know by process of elimination that MC 6
is the portion of MC Governor that specialized in maintaining social
stability among humans.Yeah? What does that mean, exactly?In Mojave
Center, that meant keeping track of various human needs, not only for
survival and protection from harm, but for emotional satisfaction:
leisure pursuits, choices of education and career, and career
organization to encourage challenges and accomplishments.Okay. But Jane
also used to guess that a component robots choice of where to hide
related to his specialty in Mojave Center.Yes, I remember. Using the
same sort of logic Jane expressed prior to earlier missions, I surmise
that MC 6 therefore deliberately fled with the question of social
instability in mind. However, England is an unusual case; since 1066, it
has had a relatively high degree of stability for an Old World nation,
despite some occasional turbulence. However, I calculate that MC 6 will
return to his full human size from miniaturization in the late fifth
century, in a time of extreme social turmoil and political instability.
Since he did not plan that, the timing is ironic, to say the least.Steve
started to answer. When he heard footsteps approaching the office, he
stopped and glanced at Hunter, who nodded. Steve opened the door.Oh-you
startled me.Harriet smiled and came in as Steve stepped back. She was
tall and slender, about forty years old, with short, wavy brown
hair.Hunter introduced them. Harriet specializes in late Roman and
post-Roman Britain.I love the period,Harriet said cheerfully. And Ive
had my dinner and my vaccinations, as you instructed. What comes
next?Have you both successfully taken your sleep courses in ancient
British and Latin?Hunter asked.Yes,said Harriet. I was familiar with
both languages, but the course will help me speak them.I took the
British, too,said Steve. And I updated the Latin from our third mission
because Hunter said it had changed some in the centuries that had
passed. But what is this British language, anyhow? Did it turn into
English later?Not really,said Harriet. Its the language that was spoken
in Britain before the Romans arrived, and it coexisted with Latin during
their occupation. It later evolved into Welsh, Cornish, and Breton. But
what we call English was based originally on Anglo-Saxon and Norman
French.But well still need the Latin this time, too?Steve asked.Well
find a lot of Latin in the time were visiting,said Harriet. But it
doesnt stay for many more years. Except for some monasteries and place
names, Latin disappears and then reenters English again much later.Oh.
Shows what I know about it.Steve turned to Hunter. Have you told Harriet
about Wayne and Ishihara? How theyre trying to beat us to MC 6 and
why?Yes, he has,said Harriet. He also told me that they kidnapped your
friend Jane on your last mission. Im sure youre worried about her.Well,
yeah. Thats true.Steve looked at Hunter. Can we go yet?We will go to the
Bohung Institute. The Security vehicle is waiting outside.Good.Hunter
drove them through the calm, clean streets of the underground city.
Steve sat next to Harriet, too tense to speak. The electric motor of the
vehicle hummed softly as they drove by humans and robots on their daily
routines who were unaware that the secret of time travel, with all its
potential danger to change history, lay in their midst.Before the first
mission, Hunter had closed the Bohung Institute. He had arranged for a
detail of Security robots to guard it. They allowed his team inside, of
course, and they walked to Room F-12.2Steve looked around the familiar
room. Room F-12 was a large facility that housed an opaque sphere about
fifteen meters in diameter. With its console, the sphere could both
miniaturize humans and robots to microscopic size and also send them
back through time, in either normal or microscopic condition.
Countertops lined the rest of the room, filled with computers, monitors,
a communication console, and miscellaneous office equipment.Hunter
introduced Harriet to R. Daladier, a robot he had left in the room to
apprehend Wayne Nystrom and Ishihara if they returned unexpectedly.Steve
waited anxiously, knowing the team would have to discuss the mission
further and change clothes before Hunter would actually take them back
in time.I arranged to have period costumes made for us earlier
today,said Hunter. He pointed to four neatly folded stacks of clothing
on one counter. Four sets of leather boots stood next to them. Please
check them for authenticity. No synthetics have been used.I see four
outfits,said Steve. We only have three of us this time.We will take a
full costume for Jane,said Hunter. I expect to find her, but she may
need period clothing. She left China in the time of Kublai Khan wearing
a robe and trousers from that culture.Right.Harriet lifted a long, brown
tunic and shook it out. Tunics for you two. Wool, of course; thats
right. A rope belt. Loosely cut, longer than kneelength. It looks
fine.She lifted another. This white undertunic is made of cotton. It was
expensive in ancient Britain. A sign of prosperity. And I see the shift
I will wear under my wool gown is also made of cotton.Underclothing of
cotton will be fur more comfortable for you two than wool, fur, or any
other acceptable choice,said Hunter. I believe the comfort will increase
your efficiency. Besides, suggesting a hint of prosperity can be part of
the roles we will play.As you decide.Harriet lifted her gown, also of
brown wool. Full-length, loose, and blousy... long sleeves. Yes, this
will be fine, too.What about the boots?Steve asked.Harriet picked up one
of them. About these roles, Hunter. What are they?From the historical
data I have taken from the city library, I suggest that I play the role
of a horse trader from Gaul. You two will masquerade as my wife and
servant. Unless you find a flaw in this plan, I would like to say that I
wish to move away from the crumbling, unstable Roman Empire in Gaul and
raise my horse herds in Britain.Go on.She put down the first boot and
studied another one.I learned that southern England in this time has
ideal horse-grazing land and that Artorius, the man upon whom the legend
of King Arthur was based, led a troop of cavalry. He would have to be
concerned about a reliable source of mounts for his men.Hold it,said
Steve, grinning in spite of his eagerness to get on their way. We arent
taking any horses with us. You cant horse-trade without them.I propose
to say that I am looking for land in Britain before bringing my herd
over the Channel,said Hunter. Would this sound reasonable?The boots are
acceptable, too.Harriet paused thoughtfully as she put the last boot
down. Yes, your story will be plausible, though you could improve on it.
However, bringing something to trade would be more convincing. You could
be an ironworker, a trader in silver, a soldier...the list of
possibilities is very long.I chose the role after due consideration,said
Hunter. I must playa role that will carry some prestige without having
to take material objects into the past. We must take some coins and our
clothing, but every item we take increases the chance of influencing
history in a way we do not intend and cannot predict. The role of
soldier might put Steve into greater danger than I would prefer.Ah-youre
a believer in chaos theory as applied to the events of history.She
smiled, amused.I no longer believe in the most pure and extreme form of
chaos theory,said Hunter. My team has made five missions into the past
without altering our own time in any way that I can detect.Good. Then
youre coming around to my way of thinking about this.Not entirely,said
Hunter. I tell each historian I hire that I do not know where the
threshold of significant change lies. If I can go into the past as a
horse trader so that we do not have to take any merchandise with us,
then we take the least risk.I do not believe in it at all,said Harriet,
casually. But youre the boss. I accept your priorities.I still say a
horse trader would take horses with him,said Steve. Even just one
stallion to show off. The people we see are going to expect that.We can
claim we brought a couple of horses that were lost in a storm as we
sailed across the Channel,said Harriet. That was not unheard-of in these
times.Am I correct in concluding that Artorius must value the source of
his mounts?Hunter asked.Oh, yes. The single greatest advantage the
Britons have over the Saxons is their training in Roman cavalry strategy
and tactics. You see, the Saxons in this time are unmounted but
numerous. Artorius had to keep his men supplied with good, healthy
horses.Good,said Hunter. He pointed to three cloth pouches on the
counter. We also have a small pouch of coins from this period for each
of us to carry.Late Roman coins?She pulled one open and drew out one of
the coins. Since we will claim to have come from Gaul, that would be our
currency. Britain primarily still uses the same, but some native coins
had to be minted, too.Our coins are all late Roman. Also, we have a
small bag for Steve to carry. It contains a change of underclothing for
each of you and some bread, cheese, and dried meat. I do not know how
long it will take us to find food for you.It shouldnt be too hard,said
Harriet. Southern England remained heavily Romanized culturally and
densely populated for many years after the Romans left Britain on its
own.Steve picked up the bag and looked inside. Okay. Ill put Janes
clothes and boots in here.I will prepare the console. Please take turns
changing your clothes in the next room.Steve waited while Harriet
changed first. Hunter walked to the console that controlled the sphere
and altered the settings. Steve began to pace again.Are you taking us
back at night again?Steve asked, glancing up at Hunter. Since were
leaving in the evening?I feel this works best,said Hunter. We arrive in
near-darkness to avoid notice.Id rather go back in daylight so we can
start looking for Jane right away.You will be ready to sleep in several
more hours,said Hunter. If we go back at a time that conflicts with your
own sleep schedule, then you and Harriet will be inefficient. Matching
your schedule to arrive in daylight would now require waiting until
tomorrow morning to leave.Well-forget it, then. Lets just go.Harriet
returned from the other room, wearing her long gown and leather boots.
How do I look?Very authentic,said Hunter.Harriet laughed lightly. I dont
think thats what I was asking, but thanks, anyway.Steve grinned but said
nothing as he went to change in the adjoining room. He emerged wearing
the long tunics and boots, which felt similar to the tunic he had worn
to ancient Germany in Roman times.The console is ready,said Hunter.
Harriet, you should know that I have the belt unit that will trigger it,
even from the time to which we are going. After we arrive, I will carry
it in a hollow space within my torso.All right.Harriet nodded, tugging
at her gown to straighten it over her rope belt. Hunter, when we first
discussed the mission, you told me we would visit the site of the
archaeological dig now known as Cadbury Castle in the time of Artorius.
How about telling us now exactly when in time our destination is?And
tell me where Cadbury Castle is,Steve added. Im still in the
dark.Cadbury Castle lies in Somerset, in central southern England,said
Hunter. The modern town of South Cadbury lies immediately to the north.
Farther north, but within sight, is the city of Glastonbury. We will
arrive on the evening of April 21, in A.D. 459.Steve grinned. I still
dont know where were going, except that well be in England.It wont be
the England most people think of,said Harriet The Roman Empire left
Britain to fend for itself against invading barbarians in A.D. 410. The
same Celtic tribes who lived there before the Romans arrived still
remained, but now they had a strong Roman cultural and military
influence. By A.D. 459, when well arrive, the Britons will have been
resisting the Saxons who had invaded and settled along the Humber and
Wash rivers in southeastern Britain for half a century. The failing
Roman Empire still just barely exists across the English Channel in
Gaul.I think I got the gist of that.Steve shrugged, still grinning.Im
sure well all manage just fine.Hunter opened the sphere. He helped
Harriet climb inside first. By this time, the routine was familiar to
Steve; as always, he slid down the curved interior surface to the
bottom, where Harriet already sat. Hunter climbed in, closing the sphere
after him to leave them in darkness.Jane Maynard landed with a thump on
wet grass. A cold drizzle fell from a dark, overcast sky. She pushed
herself up and brushed her long, brown hair out of her eyes. Wayne
Nystrom got up on her right; Ishihara, still holding her right arm in
one hand, remained on her left.Foul weather,Wayne muttered.Where are we
now?Jane demanded. A few moments ago by subjective measuring, Wayne and
Ishihara had forcibly taken her away from the palace grounds of Kublai
Khan in thirteenth-century China. First, to escape Hunter, they had
simply jumped a few hours ahead, to the peasant village where they had
been staying. Then Wayne had taken a few moments to reset his belt unit
before bringing them here, wherever it was.Were in Britain, two-thirty
in the afternoon of April 19, A.D. 459,said Wayne.Ishihara stood, then
helped Jane to her feet. This cool, damp weather is potentially harmful
to humans. We must find shelter for you, especially before
nightfall.Jane looked around, tugging her Chinese robe tightly around
her. Beneath it, she also wore matching baggy trousers. Shepherds sat
huddled under trees in the distance, surrounded by their flocks in the
drizzle; none were looking this way. Most of the terrain was open,
rolling grassland, with clumps of trees scattered here and there. Some
tilled fields lay among them, with young shoots too small to identify
from here. In the distance, she could see two high hills, one much
farther away than the other. A small village lay on the plateau of the
nearer hill, and an outer wall of earth and wood surrounded its
base.Thats why I brought us here in the middle of the afternoon,said
Wayne. We have some time before sundown.He smiled suddenly. We have even
more time before Hunter gets here.What do you mean?Ishihara asked.I
guess it doesnt matter if Jane hears this. I estimate that MC 6 will
return to his full size in a couple of days. Hunter has repeatedly
arrived within twenty-four hours of the time when the component robots
return to normal size.Wayne handed the belt unit to Ishihara.What about
it?Jane asked casually, as though the point meant nothing. She watched
Ishihara put the belt unit inside his Chinese peasant blouse. Then,
under the cloth, he opened his torso and hid the unit inside.Therefore,
we should have a few days to learn our way around, establish some
contacts, and be prepared for both MC 6 and Hunters team before they
arrive.Wayne shook his head. I should have tried this before, but in
places like a buccaneer town and the Russian front in World War II, I
didnt want to stay any longer than I had to. And in the dinosaur age and
in ancient Germany, I hadnt figured it out yet.But you planned to make
friends with those peasants in China?Jane asked.No, it just worked out
that way,said Wayne. But now, when Hunter arrives, he must consider your
welfare, too. Combining some earlier preparations with that problem for
him gives me the best chance I have had yet. Ishihara, I instruct you to
shut off your radio reception now and keep it off until I order
otherwise.Jane understood. When Hunter arrived, he might attempt to
communicate directly with Ishihara. Wayne did not want any communication
between them.Wayne looked around. Ishihara, suggest where we should go.I
propose we walk to the nearest peasant hut.He pointed to a hut from
which a narrow, lazy trail of smoke drifted low in the air. A narrow
road meandered among the hills, passing by the hut. Before we can
communicate with more than gestures, I will have to begin learning the
local language. If the response is hostile, we can walk along the road
to meet someone else, perhaps in that village.Maybe we should try the
village first. That looks a more likely place for MC 6 to show up.A
village offers more potential harm, as well,said Ishihara. If we can
find lodging elsewhere, then we can visit the village later.Yeah,
okay.Ishihara led them through the drizzle toward the hut he had chosen.
He did not bother to take Janes arm. She walked behind him, with Wayne
next to her.Jane knew Ishihara had no reason to fear she would run away
from them right now. Until she knew that Hunter and Steve had arrived,
and where they were, she had nowhere to go. She would certainly be safer
in Ishiharas company than anywhere else here, and she saw no chance she
could get the belt unit out of Ishiharas torso.For now, she would just
have to bide her time.3As they approached the hut, Jane could smell
bread baking. She was not hungry, but she liked the familiar aroma. A
donkey grazing behind the hut stopped and looked up at them. Near it, a
small farm wagon had been left under a tree. The entire scene made the
locale seem less strange.Hold it,said Wayne, stopping. Does anybody know
what language they speak here?No,said Ishihara.Jane said nothing. She
blinked drizzle out of her eyes and rubbed her arms together.My history
isnt too good,said Wayne. Are the Romans still here?The Roman Empire
ceased to defend Britain in A.D. 410,said Ishihara.If the Romans left, I
suppose no one speaks Latin here any more,said Wayne. I took that sleep
course in Latin for that trip to Roman Germany. You accessed Latin then,
too. Maybe some people here still speak it.We can make an attempt to
communicate with Latin,said Ishihara.Jane had also taken the Latin sleep
course before the mission to ancient Germany. Since Wayne and Ishihara
did not ask her about it, however, she chose not to volunteer the fact.
She had no specific plan in mind, but keeping her facility with Latin a
secret seemed like a good idea.Please go first,Wayne said to Ishihara.Of
course.Ishihara walked toward the front door of the hut.Suddenly a
couple of dogs barked in the distance behind them. Ishihara stopped and
turned. Jane looked, also, and saw two shepherds hurrying down a nearby
hill from their flock of sheep. Their dogs, both large and black, ran
ahead of them.We must wait here,said Ishihara quickly. Do not alarm the
dogs by moving suddenly. I will speak to the men when they reach us.A
woman came to the door of the hut. Four children peered from around her
long, full skirt made of some rough cloth. The youngest was a toddler,
the eldest maybe ten or eleven years old. None of them spoke. All of
them stared cautiously at the strangers.Its our clothes, I guess,Said
Wayne quietly. Jane has a fancy Chinese robe and pants and we have
Chinese peasant outfits. Well never explain them.Maybe we can use the
clothes to our advantage,said Jane. Im richly dressed by peasant
standards. They may be afraid of us as strangers, but they might not
want to turn away an important lady. And only our clothing is strange.
We looked more out of place in China, no matter what kind of clothes we
wore.Well, thats true,Wayne said slowly. He turned to study her face.
But why are you so willing to cooperate all of a sudden?I need food and
shelter as much as you do. We cant just spend the next few days standing
out in the rain.Yeah.Suddenly the two dogs ran up, still barking. They
dodged and danced around, cautious but not attacking. Jane slowly
extended one hand for them to sniff. Instead, they both jumped back.I
suggest we masquerade as a wealthy lady and her two servants,said
Ishihara.Whatever you think will work,said Wayne.We are fortunate to
have no weapons,said Ishihara. We will appear as less of a danger.As the
shepherds drew near, they slowed to a walk. Jane saw that one was only
twelve or thirteen years old. The other appeared to be his
father.Ishihara greeted them in Latin, speaking in a formal tone. Good
day. We are strangers here, seeking shelter from the rain.The shepherd
showed no sign of understanding him. He nodded politely and said
something they could not understand. Then he waited expectantly.Ishihara
lifted his hand, feeling the drizzle, and spoke in Latin again. We would
like to have shelter from the rain, at least for a short time.He
gestured toward the hut and patted his abdomen. If you can spare any
small amount of food, it would be very welcome.The shepherd nodded,
speaking again, and pointed to the village on top of the hill in the
distance.He wants us to go to the village.Ishihara continued speaking in
Latin, since Wayne and Jane both understood him. I do not see how we can
force ourselves on this family without causing them harm.They must be
more scared than they seem,said Jane.We dont have any money to pay for
food,said Wayne. Or a place to stay.Maybe Ishihara can do chores in
exchange for hospitality.Jane glanced around. Behind the hut, she saw a
small stack of cut firewood and a loose pile of uncut tree branches near
it. Some unsplit logs lay scattered around. Here-tell him I have a bad
leg.Huh?Wayne looked at her.Jane turned toward the woman in the doorway.
With a hopeful smile, Jane patted her leg under her long robe and took a
limping step toward the hut. The peasant woman looked down and suddenly
shooed her children out of the way and gestured to Jane to come
inside.As Jane feigned a limp to the doorway, her hostess pulled a
small, three-legged stool forward. She took Janes arm and helped her to
the stool, speaking in a soothing tone. Jane sat down out of the drizzle
but just inside the hut, where she could see the others.Her husband
watched cautiously for a moment, not speaking. Then his wife spoke
sharply to him. He nodded and spoke to his eldest son. The boy nodded
and plodded back up the hill toward the flock of sheep, calling one of
the dogs to follow him. The other dog walked to Jane, its tail wagging,
and sniffed her hand.The mans not going to leave the hut while were
here, is he?Wayne grinned. I guess I wouldnt, either. But now what do we
do?Ishihara, cut some wood for them,Jane said quietly. Dont ask about
it, because I think hospitality will force them to decline your offer.
Just begin.I do not see an ax or any other tool to use,said Ishihara,
looking around the small pile of wood that was already cut.Jane looked
around the hut. I can see some axes just inside the door here.Ishihara
leaned inside, picked up a long-handled ax, and carried it to the uncut
wood. Without a word, he picked up an unsplit log and began to split it.
The shepherd watched him for a moment, then walked to the doorway. He
picked up another ax and joined Ishihara.I guess he figures if he cant
tend the sheep, he might as well get something done,said Wayne.The
peasant woman stood over Jane and spoke. From her tone and facial
expression, Jane felt she was asking a question, but none of her words
meant anything to Jane. All Jane could do was shrug
helplessly.Ygerna.The woman pointed to herself. Oh-your name is
Ygerna?Jane touched her own chest with her finger. Jane.Jane.Yes.Jane
nodded, smiling.Her hostess knelt and patted her own leg where Jane had
indicated her leg was sore. She spoke again, asking the same question as
before. When Jane shrugged apologetically, Ygerna stood up and went
outside.Would they object if I came in out of the rain?Wayne asked. I
dont want to mess up a good situation, but I guess they do have the idea
that youre important and were your servants.I think youre right.Jane
smiled. Come on in. Well see what she does. As long as were considerate,
I think well be all right.Wayne came inside the hut. He squatted down
across the doorway from Jane.The children stared at both of them,
whispering among themselves, but they focused most of their attention on
Janes Chinese robe.Ygerna bustled back inside, holding what appeared to
be two handfuls of mud, grass, and other plants. She carried this
mixture to the back of the hut, where she knelt with her back to Jane.
Her children gathered around her, watching to see what she was going to
do.As Ygerna knelt in front of a narrow brick fireplace on the far side
from the door, Jane looked around the hut for the first time. A portion
of the hut had been sectioned off by a curtain hanging from the ceiling.
Since she could see small sleeping pallets on the near side of the
fireplace, she guessed that the curtain hid their parentspallet. One
rough wooden table stood in the center of the room, with wooden stools
around it. Above the fire, a small metal door was inset into the
chimney. Ygerna poured water from an earthenware pitcher into a metal
pot and hung it on a hook over the fire.A few minutes later, Ygerna
stirred the mud packs into the steaming, small metal pot. Then she
carried the pot to Jane and knelt at her feet. Her children followed her
but hung back slightly, still watching with fascination.Ygerna gently
moved Janes robe back over the leg Jane had pretended was hurting her.
Carefully, Ygerna slipped the leg of Janes trousers up. As Jane watched
in silence, Ygerna straightened her leg slightly and then began to smear
the mud poultice on it. Jane realized that the purpose of this
treatment, aside from any superstition the culture might have, was to
apply and hold the heat against her injury.Feeling trapped, Jane said
nothing. When Ygerna looked up and asked her another unintelligible
question, Jane nodded and smiled appreciatively. Over Ygernas shoulder,
Wayne caught Janes eye and smiled with amusement.When Ygerna had
finished, she quietly lifted the pot and carried it outside. She dumped
the remaining mud onto the ground and set down the pot to catch
rainwater. Then, catching the drizzle on her hands, she wiped them
off.Ishihara and Ygernas husband continued to chop and split wood
rhythmically.Ygerna called out to her husband, who stopped swinging his
ax and turned to look at her. They spoke briefly, then he nodded and
brought his ax back to the hut. Leaving it inside the doorway, he walked
back toward his flock of sheep. The dog that had remained at the hut
trotted after him.I guess they decided were okay,said Wayne, looking out
the doorway.Ygerna walked back inside the hut and knelt by the fire
again.Ishihara paused and turned to speak to Wayne and Jane. I have made
a small amount of rudimentary progress communicating with Emrys.Is that
his name?Jane asked. Hers is Ygerna. Thats all Ive learned.Yes, he is
named Emrys. He knows a few Latin words and phrases after all. When I
first spoke to him, he kept that a secret, but he has opened up now. His
limited Latin facilitated our communication. I now know a few words and
phrases in his own language.Do you know what hes doing now?Wayne nodded
toward Emrys as he hiked up the slope toward his flock of sheep. Wheres
he going?I believe Ygerna told him to bring back a sheep to slaughter
for dinner,said Ishihara. We must wait and see what he does to know if I
understood their conversation correctly.Jane looked up the hill sharply.
Then weve made a change in their lives-a big one. Every one of their
sheep must be valuable to them.Your apparent status as a lady has made
the sacrifice worthwhile, I believe,said Ishihara.Hold it,said Wayne. We
cant possibly eat a whole sheep, even the whole bunch of us.His family
can eat the rest, or sell it,said Jane. But maybe we should move on
tomorrow morning. We could be much too disruptive to this family.We
still have no money to buy food elsewhere,said Ishihara.I dont think
were going to do any real damage,said Wayne. This kind of thing isnt
likely to change history. Come on, Jane-one sheep?We should be careful,
at least,said Jane. As Hunter keeps saying, no one knows where the
threshold of change lies. What if some descendants of Emrys and Ygerna
are important at some point in English history? Or even on the world
stage someday, even centuries later? And what if we disrupt their
immediate family in some way that alters their health or survival?You
have a point,said Ishihara. However, if we can return the value of their
sacrifice, we lower the likelihood of changing their lives because of
the sheep.What do you mean?Wayne asked.I will cut as much wood as I can
without revealing that I am not human. This will save Emrys from the
chore. If we can help in other ways, I suggest we do so.Yeah, I get
it.You were right,said Jane. Look.Up on the hill, the dog Emrys had
taken with him had cut one sheep out of the flock. Emrys had already
started back and the dog was herding the single sheep back down the
slope with him. Emryss son and the other dog had moved behind him and
prevented the rest of the flock from following.A metallic squeak sounded
in the hut. Jane turned and saw Ygerna open the small metal door in the
chimney over the fire. Using a cloth to protect her hands, Ygerna pulled
out a loaf of bread in a pan. She set it down on the hearth and closed
the oven door.When Emrys arrived with the sheep, he took it behind the
hut. Jane felt relieved. Butchering sheep would be normal for him, but
she did not want to watch. Ishihara continued to cut and split logs.Jane
sat patiently, glad to be out of the drizzle and relieved that they
would be fed and, she felt certain, given shelter for the night. On the
other hand, the realization that she was trapped with Wayne and Ishihara
for at least several more days finally sank in. Even when Hunter
arrived, she might not be able to get away immediately. Surviving in
this time without money to spend would require genuine effort.Ygerna
kneaded more bread dough and put it in the bread pan. While it rose she
went outside and around to the back. Her children trailed after her, but
Wayne and Jane stayed inside the hut.After a few minutes Ygerna came
back inside, carrying a large cut of mutton. She knelt again at the
hearth and began cutting it into smaller pieces with a large knife.
Outside the hut again, she filled a large cookpot with water from a
cistern and carried it back to the fire. She hung the pot over the fire
and dropped the chunks of mutton into the water. In a few minutes, the
water began to boil.Smells horrible,Wayne whispered.The meat cant be
bad,said Jane quietly. Its really fresh. Maybe mutton always smells like
that. Ive never had any.With effort, Emrys carried a large, bulging
cloth bag to a tree and threw a rope over a low-hanging branch. From the
size of the burden and the blood soaking the bag, Jane saw that it held
the sheep carcass. He hoisted the bag into the air, high enough to keep
the dogs away from it.Jane understood that the cool temperature would
preserve it for a while. It still looked like too much meat for his
family alone to eat before it spoiled. Obviously, he had the same
problem every time he slaughtered a sheep, so he would have some normal
routine to avoid wasting the meat. She wondered what it would be.4The
drizzle continued through the afternoon. As the day cooled, the wind
came up and the drizzle turned to rain. Emrys called for his son to
bring the flock back to a small pen behind the hut. Then the boy joined
the family inside. Ishihara went on chopping wood.Emrys started to close
the door of the hut against the rain. With a questioning glance at Jane,
he paused to point to Ishihara.Ishihara, come in,Jane said in English.
If you were human, youd be exhausted by now.Of course.Ishihara brought
his ax, stopping to wipe the mud from his feet on a patch of grass
before he came inside the hut. Then he dried the ax blade on a rag that
hung on a hook next to the other ax.Just as Emrys closed the door, Jane
saw that Ishihara had stacked more new firewood than Emrys had cut and
split before they arrived.Once Emrys had closed the door, the fire
warmed the hut quickly. Ygerna ladled chunks of boiled mutton onto
wooden plates that already held pieces of bread. She took one first to
Jane, then served her supposed servants. Emrys received his dinner next,
followed by Ygerna and the children.By now Jane was very hungry. She did
not really like the mutton, but she knew that Emrys and Ygerna had
sacrificed a sheep for their benefit, so she ate it all. The bread,
chewy and dense, tasted better than it looked. After everyone had eaten,
Ygerna served some sort of herbal tea in wooden cups.Jane and Wayne did
not speak. However, Ishihara pointed to objects around the hut and asked
the children to tell him what they were called. Sometimes Emrys and
Ygerna, laughing, helped them.Ishihara seems to be learning to speak
with them quickly,said Jane. I guess his knowledge of Latin helps, but I
wonder how thoroughly he can pick up their native language.He does very
well,said Wayne. He learned rudimentary Chinese quickly because he can
apply linguistic principles from the languages he knows to a new
language.I see.Jane nodded. Since Ishihara had no memory lapses of the
kind humans routinely had in the learning process, once he learned
patterns and vocabulary, he immediately possessed full use of
them.Ishihara turned to Wayne. They want to know where we came from.
What shall I say?We have to justify our Chinese clothing,said Jane. That
is, we have to explain why its different. I doubt they ever heard of
China.Maybe you can just tell them we came by ship across the
Channel,said Wayne.Thats it,said Jane. Tell them we were shipwrecked by
a storm.I understand,said Ishihara. This will explain why we have no
belongings or money.Yeah,said Wayne. Its perfect. Thats why a lady with
servants could be broke.Ishihara spoke to their hosts, including the
children, in short phrases sprinkled with Latin. Ygerna, in particular,
asked more questions. Finally she and Emrys both nodded in
understanding.For the night, Jane was given the childrens sleeping
pallets. The children moved behind the curtain with their parents. Emrys
gave Wayne and Ishihara clean wool blankets to roll up in on the
floor.Jane bundled up on the sleeping pallet. The hut remained warm and
cozy from the fire. She fell asleep to the sound of rain on the roof.In
the morning, Jane awoke to the sound of the children talking and
giggling. Ygerna hustled them outside; when Jane opened her eyes, she
saw through the open doorway that the rain had stopped, though gray
clouds still covered the sky. Under her blanket, she carefully arranged
her robe in its proper position, then got up to find the out
house.Outside, Wayne was splashing water on his face at the cistern.
Ishihara had already begun to chop wood again. The air was cool and
brisk.When Jane returned to the hut, Ygerna was stirring a pot of hot
porridge over the fire. She served wooden bowls of the thick porridge to
everyone around the table. Jane called in Ishihara, in order to continue
his masquerade as a human.Now what do we do?Wayne asked quietly in
English. Are we going to have to leave now?I dont know,said Jane. Maybe
we shouldnt put too much burden on one family.Should I ask?Ishihara
asked.We should be careful how we phrase the question,said Jane. We dont
want to insult them.They probably assume we want to get on the road to
our ultimate destination,said Wayne. They heard last night that we were
shipwrecked and left with nothing, but we still must have been going
somewhere.Good point,said Jane. So where are we going? Wed better have
our story straight.Ygema and Emrys listened curiously, watching them as
they all ate.I only know the year and our location,said Wayne. I have no
idea whats going on in history now. Where could we have been going?
Maybe London?I cant help,said Jane. This is why Hunter keeps hiring
historians to take with him.I have some rudimentary history of this
time, but no more,said Ishihara. The Romans settled London several
centuries ago under the name Londinium, but its a long way from here. We
cant actually go there if were going to find MC 6 in this area.We better
say we were coming to this area all along,said Jane. That will explain
why we wont go very far. But we dont know where we are, do we?On the
modern map, yes,said Ishihara. But I know very little about significant
locations in this time.Ask Emrys,said Jane.Whats that going to
accomplish?Wayne snickered. He already knows were lost.Exactly. And no
matter what he says, well tell him this is our destination.Of
course,said Ishihara. He turned to Emrys and spoke briefly in a mixture
of Latin and British. Then he switched back to English. The village on
top of the highest hill is Cadbury. The hill itself is called Cadbury
Tor. This is the home of a man named Artorius Riothamus.Cadbury
what?Wayne asked.Tor. It means a high hill in the local language.Oh.Is
MC 6 going to show up there?Jane asked.I believe so,said Wayne. These
component robots have been continually drawn to people of power in the
hope, I judge, of influencing them to do less harm to the humans within
their power.Then Cadbury Tor really is our destination,said Wayne. Tell
him that.And add that we cannot pay for lodging because of the
shipwreck,Jane added.Ishihara spoke to Emrys again. The shepherd
responded, nodding, and gestured outside. He grinned and gave Ishihara a
friendly slap on the shoulder.He has complimented my ability to cut
firewood,said Ishihara.Jane smiled, struggling to suppress a laugh.Emrys
wants to go to Cadbury today to sell the rest of the sheep carcass and
some of the extra firewood I have cut. He says he knows that this humble
hut,as he calls it, is not good enough for a lady such as Jane, but he
has thanked me for the labor I have saved him.Do you think we could stay
here another night, if necessary?Wayne asked.I think if we expressed
interest, and I continue to cut wood for him or find other ways to help
him, we would be welcome,said Ishihara.Jane was relieved to hear that,
but said nothing.Good,said Wayne. Tell him well be happy to go to
Cadbury with him. If we cant find a place to stay there, then we can
talk to him about coming back.Tell Ygerna that my leg is well, and thank
her for the mud poultice,said Jane. Otherwise, Ill have to fake a limp
all day.Ishihara spoke again to Emrys and Ygerna. After breakfast, Emrys
sent his eldest son out again with their dogs to take the flock for the
day. Then, at Emryss direction, Ishihara helped him load firewood and
the bagged sheep carcass into the donkey cart.Jane looked around the
countryside in the brisk morning air. Shepherds led their flocks out
again in the distance. Smoke rose from the other huts. Life here, at
least today, appeared calm and stable.While Emrys hitched the donkey,
Ygerna and the younger children came out to watch with Jane and Wayne.
She pointed to the cart and spoke sharply to Emrys.He nodded and spoke
to Ishihara, who began rearranging the wood in the cart.Whats
wrong?Wayne asked quietly. What does Ygerna want?She told Emrys we must
see that the lady can ride in the cart,said Ishihara. I will form a seat
for her with the wood.When the cart was ready, Ishihara lifted Jane into
the cart. She found her footing on the uneven firewood and sat down.
Once she had settled into the seat he had made, she found that it was
actually comfortable.The sheep carcass lay in the front, near her feet.
She was glad Emrys had put it in the cloth bag. From her high seat on
the cart, she looked down at Wayne and Ishihara.Ishihara turned to
Wayne. Emrys has room for one more next to him on the drivers bench. I
will walk, of course.Wayne nodded and climbed up next to Emrys.As Emrys
shook the reins to drive the donkey, Jane looked down at Ygerna and the
children. The kids waved shyly. She waved back, smiling.The donkey
strained under the load but pulled it forward. The cart creaked slowly
out to the road. Ishihara walked near the rear, next to Jane.When they
reached the road, Jane saw that it was soft and muddy from yesterdays
drizzle. However, she did not see any tracks in it; the mud had not been
stirred up. The donkeys hooves and the wheels of the cart sank into it
somewhat, but did not get stuck.Jane enjoyed the slow, quiet ride. Now
that her immediate worries about shelter, food, and safety had been
satisfied, she relaxed. She could not plan her escape from Wayne and
Ishihara in any detail until she knew that Hunters team had arrived in
this time, and where they were located. For now, she had nothing to do
but observe whatever she could for future reference.Emrys and Wayne
could not make casual conversation, so they did not speak; Jane had no
desire to talk to Wayne unless she had to. The cart swayed gently as the
donkey plodded slowly along. Jane watched Cadbury village as they drew
closer.A wall ringed the village on the plateau. The fact that the
village was protected this way, and lay on the flat top of a high tor
surrounded by earthwork ramparts at the base of the tor, told her that
this area was not always as peaceful as it was today. She remembered
that MC 6s specialty in Mojave Center had been social stability, and
wondered what had drawn him here.The journey to the base of the tor took
over an hour. By that time, they had passed a couple of people walking
along the road. Other people, some of them driving carts or riding
horseback, came and went from the tor. As Jane saw the open gate in the
earthworks clearly, she looked first at the donkey, then down at
Ishihara.Is this little donkey going to make it home again? He must be
worn out.Emrys expects to sell the wood and the meat. The return load
will be much lighter.Sentries at the gate glanced at the cart and waved
them through without stopping them, though they stared in wonder at Jane
in her Chinese robe. Emrys drove the cart up a steep slope to the top of
the tor. Jane saw Wayne looking around with interest and did the
same.The defensive earthworks turned out to be more than a single wall.
Four concentric walls ringed the base and the lower portion of the
slope. Starting just inside the gate, cobblestones paved the road.Its
bigger than it looked from outside,said Jane, as the donkey began
pulling the cart up the steep angle. Ishihara, how big is this
place?Ishihara scanned the area briefly. I cannot see the far side of
the tor, but if the shape of its base as a whole is roughly a circle, I
estimate that outer wall encloses approximately seven hectares.Up ahead,
the road led through an open, nearly square gatehouse in the high wall
that surrounded the summit and the village within it. Sentries held
spears lazily on the top of the wall, talking among themselves. Jane
thought the wall had been constructed of wood until the cart passed
through it. Then she found that only a breastwork of wood faced the
outside; the bulk of the wall was made of unmortared stone.Inside the
wall, they found themselves in a bustling village. Jane turned and
looked up at the inside of the wall. Now she could see that the sentries
stood on top of a wooden platform that ringed the top of the stone wall,
with the wooden breastwork rising high enough to protect them from
attackers who might have crossed the first four earthen ramparts on the
lower slope. All around the village, the interior side of the wall was
designed the same way.It looked so modest from a distance,said Jane.
This is pretty impressive.I estimate the perimeter of this wall to be
over three-quarters of a kilometer,said Ishihara. Since the wall has
neither straight sides nor represents a circle, my approximation is
quite rough.On the far side of the main gate, a two-story hall built of
timbers rose over the rest of the village. Emrys turned the cart down a
narrow side street, but Jane continued to look at the hall. If MC 6,
after returning to his full size, was going to seek the seat of power,
he would probably find it inside that hall.Jane saw that Wayne also had
taken a second glance at the hall. He almost certainly had reached the
same conclusion, but she said nothing. Maybe something else was on his
mind. In any case, MC 6 was still microscopic, possibly somewhere on the
ground at their feet this very moment.Emrys drew up the cart and greeted
a couple of men behind a booth. Chunks of meat layout on a wooden
counter, with flies buzzing over them. The men called out heartily and
waved for him to step down.As he did so, Jane realized that the men at
the booth and most of the other villagers nearby were all staring at
her. Then she saw that they looked just as curiously at Wayne and
Ishihara, in their more modest Chinese peasant clothes. None of the
villagers spoke, however.5Jane watched in silence as Emrys drew the
cloth bag back from the sheep carcass. The other men examined the meat
as Emrys talked, and then they unloaded the carcass and carried it to
their booth. One of them carefully counted a few coins into Emryss hand.
He slapped the other man on the shoulder with a quick smile and mounted
the cart again.Its interesting to watch,Jane said to Ishihara. In all
the times and places weve visited, dickering over small business
transactions seems to be about the same.Yes,said Ishihara.Emrys shook
the reins. This time he drove the donkey around a corner and followed
the narrow, crooked streets to the main doors of the large hall. He
spoke briefly to a sentry, who slipped inside.I wonder who lives
here,Jane said casually to Ishihara. She did not want to express too
much interest in the building, for fear of alerting Ishihara and Wayne
to her belief that MC 6 would eventually come here. Even if they had
reached the same conclusion, she could pretend she had not. I guess,
Emrys knows they burn a lot of wood in a building this size.I expect
so.Ishihara changed languages and spoke to Emrys, who answered at some
length.Wayne turned in the seat to look at Ishihara. What did he
say?Emrys says this is the palace of Artorius Riothamus,said
Ishihara.Artorius is a Latin name,said Wayne. Is he a Roman warlord who
stayed behind or something?Riothamusseems to mean High King,said
Ishihara. He is also called Artorius the Dux Bellorum.Thats Latin for
War Leader,said Wayne. But what does it mean as a title?I presume that
not every High King leads his men out to war personally,said Ishihara.
However, that is merely my own surmise.Were roboticists, not
historians,said Jane. Ishihara, do you have any history at all that
pertains to this time and place?Very little,said Ishihara. However, I
believe that Artorius the High King may be the man upon whom the legend
of King Arthur is based.Wayne scowled. This place doesnt look much like
the Camelot I learned about as a kid.The legend was built by
storytellers and poets and novelists over many centuries,said Jane.A
tall, burly man dressed in a worn leather tunic came outside with the
sentry and several other men. The tall man spoke to Emrys briefly, then
nodded. The other men started to approach the cart but stopped, looking
at Jane.Emrys has sold the entire cartload of wood,said Ishihara,
raising his arms to lift Jane. I will help you down.Jane stood up and
let Ishihara move her to the ground. As the workmen began carrying
armloads of wood into the palace, the first man counted out a handful of
coins into Emryss palm. Emrys opened a leather pouch at his belt and
slipped the coins inside.Jane remained with Ishihara, looking around the
village. People filled the narrow streets in every direction. She saw
booths and shops offering food, clothing, pottery, and leather goods for
sale.When the wood had been unloaded, Emrys spoke to Ishihara and waved
for Jane and him to get into the cart. Ishihara lifted Jane back into
the empty cart, then climbed in after her. Emrys started the donkey
again.He is going to buy us clothes,said Ishihara. He says he will do
this as his appreciation for my help.Thank him again for his
hospitality,Jane suggested. We were trying to pay him back, after all.I
did,said Ishihara. I think he may also be embarrassed by our clothes. He
will be happier once we blend in with everyone else.First Emrys took
them to a shop that sold used womens clothes. Jane found that all the
gowns were made of wool. She chose a simple brown one. In a stall in the
rear, she changed out of her outer Chinese robe, but kept the underrobe
that Hunter had provided to make the Chinese robe more comfortable. It
protected her from the scratchy wool of her new gown.Emrys dickered with
the shopkeeper and paid for the gown. Jane carried her Chinese robe and
trousers out over her arm. Then Emrys drove the cart to another shop
that sold only mens tunics.Jane stood patiently by the cart as Wayne and
Ishihara tried on tunics and leggings. This would have been an ideal
moment to escape them, if she had anywhere to go. However, Wayne and
Ishihara knew as well as she did that Hunter had not arrived yet.After
Emrys paid for the new tunics, he drove to another street where food was
for sale at each stall. He bought a bag of flour and a small earthenware
jar of sea salt. Then he treated his guests to a midday meal of mutton
stew and fresh buns.Jane decided that Ishiharas help had not made a big
difference in Emryss life. Although they had certainly changed his life
today, she felt he was simply taking a normal day in the village. He was
probably doing what he would have whenever he had come into the village
next.Jane decided to take her Chinese robe back to the hut and give it
to Ygerna as a gift. If Ygerna did not want to wear it, she might be
able to use the material to sew something else. Women here did not seem
to wear trousers, but Jane felt that Ygerna could use the material to
make something useful for herself or for her children.After they had
finished eating, they all mounted the cart again. Emrys drove them out
of the village, back down the cobbled road to the base of the tor. Jane
leaned against the back of the cart and gazed at the peaceful
countryside. This time, Ishihara rode in the front of the cart behind
the front seat. No one spoke until the cart had passed through the main
gate of the outer earthwork. Then Emrys spoke over his shoulder to
Ishihara.Emrys and Ishihara conversed for several moments.What is
it?Wayne asked. Are we going somewhere else today?Jane sat up, straining
to hear.No,said Ishihara. We are returning to his hut. However, he
remembers that in years past, the palace of Artorius requires the most
wood when soldiers are gathering here in the spring. They must be fed
and kept warm at night.What soldiers?Wayne asked.He says that every
spring, soldiers from allover the land of the Britons come here from
their winter homes. During the winter, only Artoriuss personal troop
lives here. Then, as spring progresses, Artorius will gather his army
and lead it against the Saxons.So is Emrys one of these soldiers?Wayne
asked. Is he going to report in?No,said Ishihara. He says that if the
palace needs so much wood now, they will need meat, too. Instead of
waiting until the soldiers arrive, he wants to drive some of his flock
back here tomorrow and sell the sheep ahead of his fellow shepherds. The
others are still waiting to hear that the men have moved back to the
palace.That one building cant hold a whole army,said Wayne. How many are
coming?That is unclear,said Ishihara. However, the seven hectares of the
enclosed tor offer a wide expanse of open land below the walled village.
I expect his soldiers sleep out there.Yeah, that makes sense.Jane did
not move or speak, but she felt her heart beating faster with
excitement. Wayne expected MC 6 to return to full size tomorrow, and
that mean Hunter would probably reach the same conclusion. If Hunters
team arrived tomorrow, then Wayne and Ishihara would want to ride back
to the village with Emrys. If they took her, she could look for an
opportunity to escape them, or at least to alert Hunter to her
whereabouts. If they left her in the hut, she would simply leave after
they had gone. She only had to hope that Wayne would not order Ishihara
to stay at the hut with her.Wayne said nothing more.Jane wondered if
Hunter would think that Ishiharas labor at Emryss woodpile was going to
create too great a change in the lives of Emrys and his family. The
coins he had received today, and the food, were not too extravagant. If
he got the jump on the other shepherds, however, he might become
substantially more wealthy than he would have been if Ishihara had not
cut all the extra firewood.At first, she could not reach any conclusion
about it. Ishihara did not seem disturbed by the problem. Then she
realized that Emrys still could sell only the wood and sheep he already
owned. Maybe he would only benefit modestly from Ishiharas help.Jane
smiled to herself. Tomorrow she would look for Hunter at the tor.Steve
felt himself tumble gently on his back to damp, soft ground. Overhead,
low, gray clouds covered the sky. In the west, a diffuse glow revealed
the setting sun behind the clouds.He pushed himself up to a sitting
position. The land nearby combined rolling hills with occasional stands
of trees. On some distant hills, he saw flocks of sheep with shepherds
and dogs.You are both unharmed?Hunter looked at them as he stood up.Im
fine,said Steve.Yes, of course,said Harriet cheerfully. Mm, smell that
rich earth. Springtime in England. Its so green and fertile here.Hunter
helped her to her feet. I will begin calling Ishihara at intervals. I do
not expect him to respond, even if he is here, but I must attempt to
reach him.Why wouldnt he answer you?Harriet asked.Wayne will almost
certainly instruct him either to shut off his reception or to listen but
not answer. Whatever plan Wayne has in mind will rely on evading us.I
dont see a castle,said Steve, suddenly alarmed. Are we in the wrong
place?No.Harriet pointed to a large hill not too far in the distance.
Large earthen ramparts ringed its base. A small walled town sat on its
summit. In the medieval sense, no castle ever stood at Cadbury. The
modern term, Cadbury Castle, refers to the entire walled tor and its
village. While we remain in this time, we might call it Cadbury Tor,
instead.So thats where were going?Yes,said Hunter. It is farther than it
looks. We must begin.Okay.Steve hoisted the cloth bag over his shoulder.
Lead the way.Hunter led them across the open grassland toward a narrow
dirt track that wound toward the tor. As they walked, Steve looked up at
the tor again. Some people rode horseback, drove wagons, or plodded out
of the main gate. He supposed they were on their way home to other
villages or huts in the countryside. Others walked or rode into the tor
from outside, including two men in steel caps holding spears as they
rode.Is that what a Roman fortress here looked like?Steve asked. It
resembles the temporary camps we saw the Roman legions build in Germany,
but this one looks permanent. I thought the Romans would build something
more impressive than this.This is a post-Roman construction,said
Harriet. The village on the plateau is fortified in part by unmortared
stone, including Roman masonry brought from elsewhere. The gatehouse has
touches of Roman architecture, too. But the overall design is Celtic.You
mean now that the Romans dont rule here anymore, the Britons are doing
everything their way again?In practical matters, Britons never forgot
their own traditions,said Harriet. Further, funding was an issue. Roman
administrators at the height of their power could pay many men to
quarry, move, and cut stone, and hire others to build with it.
Post-Roman Briton rulers had to make do with ramparts of rammed
earth.Steve nodded. She pointed to a similar hill much farther in the
distance to the north. Thats Glastonbury Tor. It still exists in our own
time, as well.So with the Romans gone, the Britons are back where they
started in fighting the Saxons?Steve asked. Except for what you said
about Roman cavalry tactics?Not completely. The Britons still have some
advantages from their Roman cultural experience, including roads,
cities, and towns. However, hordes of Saxons have already settled along
the eastern coast.You said this Artorius, who uses Roman cavalry
tactics, is the historical basis for King Arthur. Back in Room F-12, we
agreed to pretend we wanted to sell horses to him. So he rules here? Or
what?Artorius is a charismatic cavalry captain with some Roman-style
training. He has become Riothamus, or High King, of the Britons by
leading the Celtic fight for their homeland against the Saxons.If the
Saxons landed on the eastern coast, along the English Channel, why is he
here?Steve asked. If were in whats central southern England in our own
time, then were a long way from the Channel.Thats right,said Harriet.
You see, the Saxons have been coming for many decades. They have
conquered and settled considerable territory on the eastern side of
Britain.All right, I get it. Now the Britons are fighting the Saxons
along some boundary that runs through the middle of the country.Yes. Of
course, the boundary is jagged and uneven, usually represented by rivers
or ridges. And because of constant fighting, it is in flux throughout
these years. Artorius had to establish his base far enough behind the
border to have a wide buffer zone.Steve nodded. Since the Saxons are on
foot, it would take them a lot longer to march all the way here than it
would take his cavalry to ride out to meet them.Correct.Hunter, I have
to ask you the question that comes up in every mission,said Steve. We
know that MC 6 will return to full size around here somewhere, but
exactly whats he going to do? Where should we look for him?That is
usually Janes area of expertise, of course,said Hunter. Without a
roboticist to call upon, I will have to make a judgment. Based on my
experience in how Jane has made her earlier appraisals, I expect that MC
6 will want to stop the war between the Britons and the Saxons that
causes so much suffering.Yeah, that sounds like what shed say,said
Steve. We found MC 3 and MC 4 trying to stop wars, too. Of course, we
prevented that.We must prevent MC 6 from doing it, as well,said Hunter.
According to the history I took from the city library, Artorius held the
Saxons at bay during his lifetime but they eventually overwhelmed his
successors. If MC 6 succeeds in working out a long-term settlement,
however, the England of medieval, Renaissance, and ultimately modern
times will never develop, deeply changing the course of history.Oh,
piddle.Harriet laughed lightly. That possibility is preposterous.It
is?Steve looked at her in surprise. Her bluntness startled him. Why?You
see, the Saxons, Angles, and Jutes invaded Britain because of tremendous
population pressure on the Continent north of the Roman Empire and their
displacement by the movement of more powerful tribes, such as the Franks
and the Goths.Why did they come to Britain in particular?Steve asked.
Couldnt changes in what happens here cause them to go somewhere else?As
a matter of fact, they moved into Gaul in this era, as well, to settle
on the Loire,said Harriet. But by comparison, Britain was lightly
populated at the time. The desperation of the Saxons to migrate and the
comparatively modest numbers of the Britons to protect their island
dictated this period of British history. No agreement among individuals
could stop these forces.That makes sense to me,said Steve. He liked the
logic of this argument. It fit the fact that the teams appearance in the
past on other missions had not, to their knowledge, disrupted their own
time.I have already acknowledged that I cannot measure the degree to
which chaos theory can be applied to history,said Hunter. And I accept
this history as accurate. However, the First Law requires me to consider
the danger of changing history, no matter how remote it may be. After
all, as a robot, MC 6 can expect a much longer life than any human,
barring injury. If we do not take him away soon enough, he can remain in
this time to continue working out compromises as new hostilities
develop. Of course, in any case we have to take him before he reaches
the time he left and explodes with nuclear force.You re the boss, as I
said earlier,said Harriet. Im just doing my duty as your historian in
reporting my opinions to you.As far as our search is concerned, the
First Law would still impel MC 6 to attempt an end to war, no matter how
hopeless his long-term chances are,said Hunter. Following the judgment
that Jane made about earlier component robots, I believe this imperative
would take him to Artorius or maybe even the Saxon leaders.I have no
argument with that,said Harriet. You would know more about robots.I also
feel that the creation of Arthurian legend will almost certainly change
if the history upon which the earliest chroniclers based it no longer
occurs in the same way. This is possible even if the historical events
do not change. The legend seems to be quite important in British culture
and its branches in the United States and other parts of the former
British Empire.Now, that I agree with,Harriet said emphatically.
Arthurian legend-of course it could change if historical events alter.
That legend has had great cultural influence over the centuries and must
not be allowed to change.I wouldnt want to lose it, either,said Steve. I
followed it as a kid-the stories of Camelot and the Knights of the Round
Table, and Lancelot and Guinevere.Of course, we will not find them
here,said Hunter. They are legend, not history.So we agree with you
about not letting MC 6 change history after all,said Harriet. We will
find him.I guess if Ishihara had responded to your call, youd have told
us by now,said Steve.That is correct,said Hunter. I have heard
nothing.6By the time they reached the main gate at the base of the tor,
torches burned in brackets over it. Sentries in leather jerkins and
leggings picked up their spears and began to swing the solid wooden
doors closed. They waited, however, as Hunter strode up to them.Steve,
remembering that no Britons here had seen anyone of Chinese descent,
hung back in the shadows with his head down.We seek shelter,
friends,Hunter called out cheerfully in British. You have lodging in the
village, do you not?We have inns here,said one of the sentries. What is
your business?I breed horses in Gaul,said Hunter. I seek new land in
which to breed my horses. Even in Gaul, we have heard of the great
cavalry leader Artorius. I would speak with him and ask if he will
accept some of my finest stock.Yes? Where are your horses? Still in
Gaul?The sentry grinned. Next to him, his companion laughed.We took ship
from Gaul with five horses, but rough seas cast them overboard.Yes?The
sentry eyed Hunter cautiously.Have you crossed the Channel,
friend?Hunter asked. At this time of year?No,said the sentry. Rough, is
it?The same rains that fall here in the spring can rage over the seas
even harder,said Hunter.The sentry nodded, looking over Hunters tunic.
Then he glanced at Harriet and Steve. We are far inland here. How did
you come?We landed on the southern coast at Devon, then followed the
roads here.How did you know which way to come?Every shepherd and
villager on the way knows how to find Artorius.The sentry nodded
again.Who are your companions?My wife and our servant, a man from the
farthest side of the Roman Empire.Very well. Welcome, friends.He stood
aside for them to enter.Steve still kept his head down as he followed
Harriet through the gate. In the darkness, broken only by flickering
torchlight over their heads, he knew the sentries could not see him
clearly. In any case, they did not bother to look; they were closing the
gates behind him.Hunter led them up a long, cobbled road to the village
at the top of the tor. The sentries at the main gate of the wall also
watched them approach by torchlight. When Hunter stopped in front of the
gate, Steve lowered his head again and remained back in the shadows.We
seek lodging,said Hunter. The sentries below passed us.I thought as
much,said the man in front of him. Are you the last in for the night? If
so, well close this gate behind you.Yes, we are the last.Come in,
then.He, too, stood aside.Hunter led Harriet and Steve through the gate
into the village.The streets of the village were lit by torches over a
few of the doors. People still walked through the streets, especially
outside taverns. The mood seemed peaceful.Its not like the peasant
villages in medieval China, is it?Steve asked. Those were just homes for
farmers. This is more like a small town.I see shops, stables, and
taverns,said Hunter, looking up the length of the streets in each
direction. Only the taverns are still open for business, however. This
is a village in a civilized society. It also has nothing in common with
the villages we saw in ancient Germany, which belonged to a primarily
hunting and gathering society.Roman Britain was something of an outpost
in the Roman Empire,said Harriet. However, London, York, and Bath were
established as Roman bases-modest by the standards of the Mediterranean,
but civilized urban areas in comparison to the earlier British Celtic
villages. Cadbury Tor has evolved from an older country village to
something of a town, obviously because of Artorius bringing power and
wealth to the area.Jane could be here,said Steve. Wouldnt Ishihara want
to get Wayne and Jane some good shelter like this?Yes,said Hunter. For
tonight, however, we must do the same. Our search can begin
tomorrow.Lead the way,said Steve.Hunter approached a quiet tavern.
Inside, several men sat at tables drinking. Some wore leather jerkins
and leggings similar to those of the sentries. Others wore woolen tunics
like Hunters and Steves. A short, gaunt innkeeper limped forward to look
up at Hunter.Yes, friend?We seek lodging for the night,said Hunter. For
my wife and me and our servant.Show me your money.How much do you want
for the rooms?That will depend on whose money you carry.Roman coins from
Gaul.Hunter opened the pouch at his belt and spilled some coins into one
hand. He held out his palm so the other man could see them. Mostly
copper. Some silver. No gold.No gold, eh?The innkeeper scowled at the
money. Five silvers.For one room?Hunter shook his head. Two coppers,
friend.Four silvers, then.Hunter closed his fist around the coins. We
have traveled far. Two coppers is a fair price.Find it elsewhere, then,
if you can.Very well.Hunter turned abruptly and strode toward the
door.Steve and Harriet moved outside ahead of him. Just as they got
outside, however, the innkeeper hustled after them. At the sound of his
footsteps, they turned.Four coppers,called the innkeeper. For our
friends from across the Channel. A special price.Steve grinned. I showed
Hunter how to bargain on earlier missions,he whispered to Harriet.Three
coppers,said Hunter.For a room with two feather beds,Harriet whispered.
On the ground floor, with a fireplace.I have no such room with a
fireplace of its own,said the innkeeper, glancing at her.Two coppers,
then,said Hunter.Three coppers for a room with two beds and a bar on the
door,said the innkeeper. On the ground floor near the back door to the
latrine.Very well,said Hunter. He dropped three copper coins into the
mans open palm.Welcome, friends. Come inside.The innkeeper stepped aside
and swung his arm toward the door.Hunter accepted. Harriet and Steve
followed him back inside. Some of the men drinking at the tables glanced
up again, but without much interest.The innkeeper picked up a stub of
candle on a small dish and led them down a narrow hallway. He opened the
door to a small room and swung it back. Then he stepped out again.Steve
glanced around. The two beds nearly filled the room, leaving only a
small space between them. A long, narrow shelf ran along the wall from
the doorway. This room was intended for sleeping, no more.It is
acceptable,said Hunter. In the morning, I expect bowls of water for
washing.As you wish. Sleep well, friends.The innkeeper handed him the
candle dish and left.Steve drew back the covers to one bed. Well, it
looks clean enough.He pushed on the pallet. Straw, not feathers. Itll be
scratchy.Harriet laughed lightly. I trust well survive the night
somehow.I will spend the night by the door, on guard,said Hunter. Do you
need anything outside the room before I bar it for the night?Yeah,said
Steve, with a grin. A quick trip out to the latrine. And dont bar it
before I get back, either.Of course I will not.Hunter sounded
puzzled.That was a joke, Hunter.When Steve returned, Hunter barred the
door and touched the candlewick lightly with one finger to put it out.
As the humans got into bed, he listened for any sounds suggesting danger
and heard none. He remained alert throughout the night, motionless to
conserve his energy.Morning arrived without incident. When Hunter heard
footsteps elsewhere in the inn, he went out and repeated his request for
bowls of water from the innkeeper for Harriet and Steve. By the time the
innkeeper fetched water from the cistern and Hunter returned to the
room, both Harriet and Steve were up and dressed.Soon they went to the
dining area in the front. Steve brought the teams bag with him, since
they had not paid for a second night in the room. The men from the night
before were not there, but two other men in woolen tunics sat hunched
over bowls of hot cereal. The fire in the fireplace had gone
out.Remember to speak British,Hunter whispered in that language. We will
be overheard and we want to sound as though we belong.As you
wish.Harriet drew in a deep breath. Ah, feel that brisk spring air
again. I love it.Im hungry,said Steve, moving to an empty table. This
one okay?Of course,said Hunter.The innkeeper hurried out to greet them
and offered breakfast. In the daylight, he took a second glance at Steve
in surprise, but said nothing. For breakfast, he served wooden bowls of
hot oatmeal and herbal tea. He also brought out a small dish of honey
for flavoring.Its quite familiar,said Harriet, inhaling the steam rising
from the oatmeal. I suppose oatmeal and honey havent changed a great
deal over the years.Its good,said Steve. Not that I like oatmeal much.
Good enough, though.I reviewed my conversation with the sentries at the
outer gate,said Hunter. While my claim to be a horse breeder and trader
got us inside the tor, I now believe that Steve is correct that this
will not bring us to an audience with Artorius. Without horses to show a
prospective buyer, the pose will no longer be useful.At least were
inside.Steve shrugged. Maybe we can just hang around here in the village
and ask for people of Janes and MC 6s descriptions.I prefer to act more
aggressively,said Hunter. Harriet, we discussed some other possible
social roles before we left. Would you suggest another?Well, you didnt
want to be soldiers because that might be more dangerous to Steve,said
Harriet. But without other supplies to bring Artorius-food, armor, or
weapons, mainly-thats the best way to get the attention of a military
commander. You could start by joining up and then look for an
opportunity to meet him.Hold it.Steve swallowed and put down his spoon.
I have another problem with this. I learned the hard way in the
Caribbean that Im no fighter.Really?Harriet turned to him. What
happened, may I ask?I tried fighting a couple of times.Grinning, Steve
shook his head. One guy almost carved me up with a rapier, but someone
interrupted us. Running around on deck during a boarding was even
crazier. And what kind of soldier can Hunter be? Hes not allowed to harm
humans.Our goal does not require fighting,said Hunter. We simply want to
be involved in life around Artorius, where MC 6 will probably appear.
Harriet, how soon will Artorius go to war again?Thats hard to say,she
said slowly. In a sense, despite short-term truces and treaties, Britain
is more or less in a state of ongoing war between Britons and Saxons.Can
you make any sort of calculated estimate about when the next campaign
will begin?Hunter asked.Let me think out loud for a moment. The earliest
chronicles dont give the years in which battles took place, let alone
months and days. The odds are, however, that none ever took place here
at Artoriuss capital, or that fact would have been mentioned.If he has
to march somewhere else for battle, well have plenty of warning,said
Steve.Most of the battle sites were vague,said Harriet. Some are
completely unknown, but Artorius will certainly have to go out on
campaign to reach them.Hunter.Steve switched to English and spoke in a
whisper. For this subject, we cant risk being understood by anyone else.
If Artorius goes out on campaign while were here, are you going to let
us desert from his cavalry to avoid getting into a battle?We must always
remember that MC 6 is our first goal, but of course I cannot put either
of you into more danger than necessary under the First Law.I think you
just dodged my question.Steve grinned wryly. Can we desert or not?If
necessary, I will certainly take you out of danger,said Hunter.That
hasnt always worked out as weve planned,said Steve. But Ill go along
with this if you really want to.I suggest we also expand on our personal
story.Harriet whispered in English also.What do you have in mind?Hunter
asked.We should maintain our claim to have traveled from Gaul recently,
or we will be branded liars. But in order to explain your desire to
fight for Artorius, we should explain that we are Britons.And we just
moved to Gaul for a while to live?Steve asked skeptically. That sounds a
little thin to me.Thats not all,said Harriet. I suggest we come from
Linnuis, a British district which the Saxons have taken over. This would
explain why we were displaced in years past and fled to Gaul when a ship
was available. Now we have managed to come back to Britain.I
understand,said Hunter. This improves our story. Where is
Linnuis?Historians believe Linnuis was modern Lincolnshire. It lies on
the coast of the North Sea, northeast of here across the width of
Britain.We will use this as our story,said Hunter, speaking British
again. How should we make our attempt to enlist with Artorius?After
breakfast, I suggest you ask the sentries at the main gate to the
village.Very well,said Hunter.I can hardly believe this.Steve laughed
lightly, still whispering in English. We rode dinosaurs, sailed with
buccaneers, and ambushed Roman legions. We landed in the middle of World
War II, met Marco Polo and Kublai Khan, and now were going to join King
Arthur. Wow.7After breakfast, Steve followed Hunter and Harriet out of
the inn to the street. Merchants had already opened their shops and
stalls by now. The village gate stood open and people walked up and down
the streets.Steve liked the idea of accompanying Artorius and his men
for a while, as long as no battles with Saxons were involved. He wished
Jane could see him join up; she would probably find it funny and she
might even be impressed by it. Then his mood dampened as he wondered
where she was.Hunter,Steve said, falling into step with him just before
they reached the village gate. How about spreading the word around the
village that were looking for Jane before we sign up?I can do that,said
Harriet. While you two enlist, I will spend the day asking about Jane
around the village. And I will ask about our missing friend.Will you be
safe here?Hunter asked.Yes, I think so.The village is peaceful,the
sentry said. She will be safe.All right,said Hunter.Here. Ill carry the
bag today. Youll need your hands free.Thanks.Steve handed it to her.Of
course.Harriet turned and strolled up the street.Steve shrugged,
disappointed.Different sentries stood by the gate. As Hunter approached,
one turned toward him, leaning on his spear.Good morning, friend,said
Hunter.Fair,said the sentry.My friend and I had to flee our home in
Linnuis to escape the Saxons. We would like to fight with Artorius. How
do we volunteer?You want to volunteer?The sentry eyed Steve with
curiosity for a moment, saying nothing. Then he turned back to Hunter.
All right, then. Step over here.The sentry moved to the middle of the
open gateway and pointed. On the steep slope of the tor below, Steve
could see forty or fifty armed men milling around. Some were mounted;
others walked horses by their reins. From this vantage point, he could
also see a pen holding a few other horses on the far side of a storage
building.Lucius takes the new recruits out every morning,said the
sentry. They just finished breakfast a short time ago. Go down and ask
for Lucius.Thank you,said Hunter. If those are the new recruits, where
are the others?Most of the veterans have not arrived from their winter
homes. Artoriuss personal troop is at leisure today, except for those on
patrol.I see.Steve and Hunter walked out of the gate and down the
cobbled road. The new recruits were slowly mounting and lining up, with
several burly men in leather jerkins shouting orders. One man on a large
bay waited silently, watching them all. Hunter walked up to him.Are you
Lucius? We are Hunter and Steve.Yes. What do you want?Lucius studied
Hunter with interest.We wish to volunteer and ride with Artorius against
the Saxons.Hmm. We can always use a man of your stature, if we have a
horse to carry your weight.Lucius glanced at Steve. Do you speak our
language?Yes, I speak British.From where do you come?From the eastern
side of the Roman Empire. We have been in Gaul until recently.Gaul?My
wife and I fled Linnuis ahead of the Saxons,said Hunter. The three of us
arrived here last night.Well, you are no Saxons. Do you ride? Have you
fought before?We both can ride,said Hunter. However, we have not fought
much.Do you have horses?No.Lucius frowned. I feared so. We are always
short of good horses.You are taking new recruits,said Hunter. Will you
take us or not?The personal troop of Artorius has its full complement of
three hundred,Lucius said sternly. But word has gone out for last years
veterans to come from their farms and villages. Most of them will have
their own mounts and a few may bring new ones, too.He pointed to the
wooden building on the slope behind the new recruits. I will see if you
can ride or not. Go to the tack building and tell the groom to mount
you.We have no weapons,said Hunter.The armorers store stands on the near
side of the building,said Lucius. Stop there first and tell him to
outfit you. And hurry; we will ride out soon.Steve followed Hunter
through the crowd of men and horses. Ahead, Steve saw the armorer
standing outside a wooden building watching them come. He was a short
man with long, gray hair and beard. When he turned and moved inside the
building, he walked with a pronounced limp.By the time Steve and Hunter
reached the building, the armorer had come outside again. He tossed two
round wooden shields on the ground in front of them and then dropped two
short swords on the shields. Without a word, he limped back into the
building.I guess he knew what we wanted when he saw us coming,said
Steve, picking up a sword and shield. No swordbelts or scabbards,
though.Roman short swords,said Hunter. British shields. I suppose the
armor will be made of leather.So it is,said the armorer gruffly as he
came out again. He leaned two spears against the wall of the building.
But not for you, friend. Youre too big. Ill have to boil a new hide and
slap it on you when you ride back this afternoon.Boil it?Steve asked.The
armorer snickered, revealing broken teeth. A first-timer, eh? Well,
youll learn.He reached inside the door and pulled out a large, rigid
piece of leather, about the size and shape of Steves torso. It bent at
the shoulders, with a hole for his head; the bottom was cut short at the
waist. Thongs dangled from holes along each side. Lace those on.Steve
slipped it over his head and onto his chest and abdomen. Its hard.Boiled
leather will turn a blade almost as well as steel,said the armorer. It
just wears out faster, over time. But if you had the money to buy steel,
youd be wearing it.Hunter moved to Steves side and began lacing the
leather armor on him.How do you get the shape?Steve asked.I boil it in a
vat of water till its nice and soft. Then I slap on your body steaming
hot, and youd better be wearing a tunic when I do.The armorer grinned.
It takes the shape of your body and cools that way.I see. Uh, what
happened to the guy this belonged to before?He died of a fever.The
armorer stepped back inside again and came out with two conical caps.
Here.He tossed a cap to each of them.Steve put on the cap. A leather
band inside the rim padded it somewhat. It fit him well enough.A boy of
about ten led two horses up to them, already saddled and bridled.The
groom saw you coming,he said shyly to Hunter. We got you the biggest
horse we have.Thank you.Hunter took the reins and mounted. He will be
fine.Steve slipped his shield on hisleft arm and carefully stuck a sword
through the belt of his tunic. Then he mounted the second horse, which
pranced and shook. He kept control of his mount, however. The armorer
handed him his spear.Hes a good horse,said the boy. But he spent all
winter in pasture. Hes only three and he hasnt had a rider since last
fall.I like him,said Steve. Hunter, the troop is riding out. Wed better
go.Yes.Hunter reached down to take his spear from the armorer. Thank
you, friends.Steve and Hunter rode back across the slope and followed
the rear of the troop out the main gate at the base of the tor. The
morning air was still cool, but the clouds overhead had begun to
scatter. Steve grinned with excitement, wondering what Lucius would have
the troop do.They did not ride far. In the open, rolling country outside
Cadbury, Lucius ordered the troop to split into squads, ordering each to
fallout and drill separately. Because the squads formed immediately,
Steve saw that they had already been assigned.Hunter and Steve rode up
to Lucius, who had reined up on the crest of a hill to observe the
troop.We are ready, friend,Hunter said heartily. Where should we go?Eh?
Oh, yes.Lucius pointed to a nearby squad. These are squads of ten, but
that one is short. Your squad leader, Cynric, will drill you.Steve
followed Hunter to the squad. A short, stocky man had been shouting
orders to the group. Just as Steve and Hunter reached them, Cynric
raised his spear and turned his horse. He led the squad away in a
canter.Steve kicked his own mount and followed. His young horse eagerly
took off. Hunters mount also moved into a canter, more reluctantly.
Steve left him behind as the squad rode across the open grassland.Soon
Cynric took the squad into a full gallop. Then, without warning, he
pulled up sharply. Just as the squad gathered around him, he kicked his
mount again and took off in another direction. Steve laughed and
followed with everyone else.This time, Cynric led the squad in a long,
sweeping curve back toward their starting point. Three of the riders
took the curve too fast and lost it, angling wide; two others tried to
take it too sharply and lost speed. Steve watched Cynrics movements
carefully and followed him without trouble, with two other riders.
Hunter remained behind him.Cynric stopped again on the slope near
Lucius. Steve reined up behind him, and Hunter joined him a moment
later. They waited for the stragglers to canter back to them.Steve,
getting a good look at the othersfaces for the first time, saw that most
of them were teenagers. He supposed they had either come from villages
or shepherd families. They would know how to ride casually, but not on
military maneuvers.Cynric studied Steve and Hunter with pale blue eyes.
Who are you, anyway?His voice was gruff.I am Hunter. This is my friend
Steve.And Lucius sent you to me.Yes,said Hunter.Well...I dont get a lot
of grown men in this troop. You two ride better than most of these
youngsters. Can you fight?We have never fought on horseback,said
Hunter.Im not surprised;Cynric said sourly. He threw his spear into the
ground and raised his voice to the entire squad. Form a line and follow
me. You will ride at full gallop past this spot and throw your spears
into the ground next to mine-if you can.Jane rode in the back of Emryss
cart again that morning. As before, Ishihara sat in the front and
firewood filled the rest of the bed; Wayne rode on the seat with Emrys.
However, this time they followed almost half of Emryss flock of sheep.
One of his dogs herded the sheep forward along the road toward Cadbury
Tor.When Jane saw the riders leaving the main gate of Cadbury Tor, she
looked up. Even at a considerable distance, she was sure that the large
rider trailing the rear of the troop had to be Hunter. The fact that a
man Steves size rode just ahead of him seemed to clinch it.Jane glanced
up at Wayne and Ishihara. Wayne yawned and watched the sheep. Ishihara
was rearranging the firewood slightly.Ishihara,said Jane. She did not
know what she was going to say, but she wanted to distract him from
seeing Hunter and Steve. Wayne was not as likely to recognize them, even
if he looked in their direction.Yes?Uh, how safe are we?A concern about
the First Law would command a robots attention the most.What do you
mean?Ishihara looked at her.Well...were very vulnerable, dont you
think?Jane frantically tried to think of a specific worry she could
express to him.To what?To the unknown. I mean, we hardly know whats
going on around us, do we?Thanks to Emrys and Ygerna, we have food,
clothing, and shelter. Neither they nor anyone in the village seem to
have any pressing fears.Its not as civilized as China was.Jane glanced
at the troop again. They had ridden away from the tor, but Hunter
remained easily recognizable at the rear.We are much safer here than in
Roman Germany,said Ishihara.Yeah...thats true, I guess. But maybe a war
will start here, too.Perhaps. I expect to have some warning, however. We
all knew that a battle would begin outside Moscow in 1941, but we
survived.Its a terrible risk under the First Law, isnt it?Jane
stretched, and gazed casually around in several directions to camouflage
another look toward the troop. Now the column of riders had divided into
small groups. For a moment, she could not find Hunter. Then she saw that
his group had begun to ride away, fast. She relaxed a little.The
searches for MC 3 and MC 4 ended in much greater danger than we face
here so far,said Ishihara. I assure you again that I will take you and
Wayne away from danger if necessary.He patted the spot on his torso in
which he had placed the belt unit.I know,Jane said quietly. She looked
at Wayne. He did not seem to have noticed Hunter and Steve.Jane wondered
if the troop would ride back into the tor while Emrys was still selling
sheep and firewood there. If so, she might have a chance to get Hunters
attention. She would have to hope that Wayne and Ishihara would not
notice Hunter first.8Steve moved into the line as the squad prepared to
throw spears. Ahead of him, the other riders waited for Cynric to wave
his arm in a sharp downward slash. Then the first rider kicked his
mount, rode at full gallop about fifty meters, and threw his spear into
the ground next to Cynrics.When Steves: turn came, he hefted his spear
in his right hand and looked at Cynric. At the signal, he took off and
eyed his target. Several other spears had stuck in the ground near it;
others had fallen flat. Steve threw his without slowing his mount.His
spear flew forward but instead of sticking in the ground, it landed flat
on the grass. He reined in near the other riders and turned. Hunter came
next.At the signal, Hunter rode forward. As he neared the target, he
threw his spear. It angled through the air and stabbed into the ground
next to Cynrics.Around them, scattered allover the rolling hills, the
other squads conducted similar exercises.As Hunter rode up next to
Steve, Cynric nodded approval. When the squad had finished throwing
their spears, they gathered around Cynric. Steve suddenly wondered if he
might be cut from the troop and Hunter retained.Cynric said nothing
about it, however. Leave your spears where they are. Form two lines
facing each other, two horse lengths apart. When I signal, move against
the rider across from you. I want to see you handle your swords and
shields. Lay on hard, now-this is no game.As the riders formed the
lines, Steve and Hunter moved across from each other. At Cynrics signal,
all the riders rode forward. Steve found that the real challenge to this
exercise was holding the reins in his left hand while using the shield
on his left arm to protect himself.Hunters blows were light, at least by
Hunters standards, and always landed on Steves shield, no matter how he
moved it. Steve swung his own sword with more abandon, secure in the
knowledge that Hunter could easily block each stroke with his own
shield. On each side of them, the other squad members did the
same.Cynric rode slowly behind each line, circling the squad. He shouted
instructions and encouragement at times. After a while, he ordered them
to halt.Steve lowered his sword and shield and grinned at Hunter with
relief.Take up your spears again,Cynric called out. Then, as the riders
moved out of their line, he turned to Hunter. You sit a horse well for a
man your size.Thank you for the kind words.Hunter nodded acknowledgment.
Tell me something. I always heard that the Saxons have no horses. In
Linnuis, I never saw a mounted Saxon. Why do you have us perform this
exercise against another man on horseback?A man who fights for Artorius
must be at home on his mount,Cynric said sternly. Besides, occasionally
a Saxon patrol will take a horse or two. But you are right. In the main,
a battle against the Saxons means a small British cavalry against a much
larger army of Saxon foot.Steve had to dismount to pick up his spear.
While he was on the ground he handed a couple of the other spears up to
other squad members. Then, clumsily cradling his own in the crook of his
left arm, he managed to mount again.Hunter plucked his own spear from
its vertical position in the ground and rode up next to Steve.Harriet
radioed me a moment ago,Hunter said quietly. She is well, but has seen
no sign of MC 6.Is she just going to walk up and down the streets of the
village all day?Perhaps not. She has seen some from the citadel come out
to shop. Since Artorius probably lives there, she hopes to speak to
them.Hey, maybe she can get inside somehow.Follow me!Cynric shouted
suddenly, holding spear high. Now!He rode away abruptly, as before.The
squad, caught by surprise, took off after him.The remainder of the
morning continued the same way. Cynric ordered specific exercises with
weapons, often divided by sudden orders to charge across the hills.
These charges sometimes were straight, and sometimes curved; the riders
had to stop and wheel around quickly, changing direction. Finally, at
midday, wagons came out of the tor to bring bread, cold mutton, and
water to the squads. The horses were watered and rested.In the
afternoon, the nature of the exercises changed. Now the squads worked
together, maneuvering in combinations of ten, with a hundred riders
each. Steve stayed close to Hunter. Finally, in late afternoon, Lucius
gave the order to return to the tor.As Steve and Hunter rode on weary
mounts with the rest of the troop back to the main gate, Cynric rode up
alongside them.You will join us in the camp,said Cynric.You are in a
camp?Hunter asked. I have not seen a camp. Where is it?Cynric grinned.
Behind the village, on the far slope. The green recruits are kept out of
the way.Steve wondered what Hunter wanted to do about Harriet, but he
did not ask. A blunt conversation would have to wait until they were out
of the hearing of others. He looked up at the village and wondered if
Jane was there somewhere.Hunter knew that he could not call Harriet. He
had no idea if she had company within the hearing of her lapel pin. If
they could not find her in the streets of the village, then he would
have to wait for her to call him again.At the paddock, each rider
unsaddled and brushed down his own mount. Then they were dismissed.
Hunter, however, walked back to the armorer, who had a fresh leather
boiling in a big vat.Is that for me?Hunter asked.Keep your tunic on to
protect yourself from the heat,the armorer said gruffly.Steve stood by
as the armorer pulled the steaming leather out with a long, hooked pole.
The leather had a hole already cut out of the middle and the armor
lowered it over Hunters head. Moving quickly, the armorer tied it snugly
around Hunters waist with a piece of old rope. Steam rose from the
leather.Im glad he already had one my size,Steve muttered. Thats hot.No
one ever died of this,growled the armorer. Ive been doing it for years.
That tunic hes wearing will protect him.I am fine,said Hunter.The
armorer quickly tied the leather around Hunters arms, as well, so that
it fit tightly around his entire torso. Then he began to punch holes up
and down the sides in straight lines, ignoring the uneven shape of the
leather. By the time he had finished, the leather no longer steamed.The
armorer knocked on the leather against Hunters chest. It gave slightly.
Still soft,he muttered. Just wear that for a few more minutes.Hunter
nodded.The armorer drew a knife and began trimming the leather. He cut
it off at Hunters waist and straightened the edges running down the
robots sides from under his arms. By the time the armorer had cut the
last pieces off, he had to use a great deal of effort to slice the blade
through the leather.Should be finished now.The armorer knocked on the
Hunters back. This time, it made a thunking sound. Thats it. Here, Ill
lift it off.Hunter bent forward so the armorer could raise it over his
head.Steve saw that the leather had now solidified into a hard shell
that maintained its shape, just like the leather he was still wearing.It
needs a little more trimming. And some of these holes need to be punched
out more cleanly. Ill do that. When you come back in the morning, Ill
have thongs for you to lace the sides closed. After that, you keep
it.Thank you.The armorer nodded and carried the new armor inside his
building.Some recruits walked around the slope to the rear side,
avoiding the village. Others took the cobbled road up to the village
gate. Hunter and Steve walked back up to the gate together.Hunter,
Harriet here.Her call came through his internal receiver.Yes, Harriet.I
can see you walking back up the hill and I got a moment alone. Did you
see MC 6 anywhere?No. Tell me where you are. We must confer.I think wed
better talk now. Im in the palace. And if I leave, I dont know if Ill be
welcome back.What do you mean?Well, I struck up a conversation with some
of the women who live here. One is the wife of an adviser to Artorius
and another is the grown daughter of some elderly military man. Im not
sure exactly what he does. But I explained that my husband and our
servant had come from Linnuis by way of Gaul to fight and that I was now
unescorted.They simply invited you into the palace?Not exactly. We
talked for a while. They are very conscious of social class. I am
clearly not a peasant. When they asked about you, I explained that you
were a very wealthy and successful horse breeder and trader. They know
that Artorius needs an ongoing supply of good horses.What
happened?Gwenhwyvaer, the daughter of the military man, has been very
kind. We get along well. She invited me to stay with her. But she had to
argue with some of the others. I dont want to seem ungrateful by asking
to go out again today. But if everything is still okay tomorrow, maybe I
can meet you in the village.Then you have safe lodging for the night?Oh,
yes. As long as I dont offend anyone. And I may have a chance to spot MC
6 here, if he has regained his full size by now.Very well. I will wait
for you to call me again. If you feel any potential danger, call
immediately.All right, Hunter. Harriet out.Hunter related the
conversation to Steve. Instead of going up to the village to look for
her, I suggest we go to the camp in the rear to find out where we will
sleep.Good idea.Jane had hoped to remain in the village until the troop
returned. However, Emryss business did not take long enough. In the
morning, he had bargained with men from the palace for the sheep. After
some spirited haggling, Emrys had sold them all to the palace, improving
the deal by offering the firewood, as well. He had received both coin
and barter in the form of some wool and two piglets that had to be tied
inside the wagon.At Janes request, Emrys had agreed to spend more time
in the village. They visited an open-air stall at midday to eat and then
browsed through the shops. However, in the middle of the afternoon, he
had decided to return home. As they had taken the wagon back down the
slope toward the gate in the outer wall, Jane had seen the troop of
riders still maneuvering in the distance.Jane watched Wayne and Ishihara
carefully all day. In turn, they looked at everyone in the village, but
only glanced casually at the troops on maneuver in the distance. She
could not figure out why Ishihara did not examine the troops more
closely.Although she did not want Ishihara to notice Hunter if he had
not seen him already, she wanted to find out what priorities he was
using. She waited until the wagon had left the main gate and traveled
down the road, leaving the troops out of sight around a bend. Then she
raised the subject indirectly, speaking in English so that Emrys would
not understand.Ishihara.Yes.As I understand it, Wayne will only instruct
you to let me go if he can either get MC 6 or bargain for him with
Hunter. Right?Yeah?In the front seat by Emrys, Wayne turned around and
glared at her suspiciously. Weve already established that. What of
it?When are we going to get this underway? I dont want to live here
forever.Calm down, will you?Wayne said sourly. I dont like waiting,
either. But we cant do anything till we find at least one of them.So
were just going to visit the village every day and look around? What if
Emrys doesnt want to go back tomorrow? He has chores at home.If we have
to, well hike in ourselves,said Wayne. Right, Ishihara?If you wish.And
then we just stand around?Do you have a better idea?Jane looked at
Ishihara. Tell me if you know where MC 6 or Hunter is.Ishihara turned to
look at Wayne. What should I do? You instructed me not to discuss this
subject with her or in front of her.Wayne grinned. Go ahead and answer.I
do not know where MC 6 is,said Ishihara. I may know where Hunter is but
I am not certain.Nice try.Wayne snickered. You cant order him to tell
you something he doesnt know.Thats not the point,said Jane. For the
moment, she decided not to sound too eager to learn what Ishihara might
know about Hunter. Do you guys have a plan or not?Ive calculated that MC
6 will return to his full size in the tor,said Wayne. Ive instructed
Ishihara to prioritize spotting him.Jane decided to risk reminding them
of the troops. Does that include people outside the tor? Say, shepherds
like Emrys, or traders coming to and from the tor?I have looked at the
people we have passed on the road,said Ishihara.How about those
riders?Wayne asked. The guys with the spears? They were too far for me
to see clearly.None of them is small enough to be MC 6,said Ishihara.
One of them is large enough to be Hunter. With the movements of the
riders, I was not able to ascertain this for certain, even at the
maximum magnification of my vision. A man the size and build of Steve
rode very close to him.Jane said nothing. She had recognized Hunter. At
least she now knew what Ishihara had seen. The reason he had not
mentioned it in her hearing before was that Wayne had instructed him not
to do so.Youre sure that MC 6 is not riding with that outfit?Wayne
asked.Yes.Good. For now, well let Hunter waste his time with them. Well
focus on finding MC 6 first.Jane said nothing more.Steve and Hunter
found the camp on the far slope. A single large command tent stood at
the top. Two unhitched wagons stood next to it, full of closed wooden
crates. Small campfire sites, cold at the moment, dotted the area,
surrounded by small bundles of furs and cloth bags.Cynric met them there
and showed them which campfire belonged to their squad. He also pulled
some old blankets out of a crate in one wagon and gave them to Steve and
Hunter. The other squad members had not come back yet.After Cynric
walked away, Steve sighed and looked up at Hunter.What is wrong?Hunter
asked. He set his blanket down on the ground..Well be sleeping out under
the stars. It was cold last night. Even next to the fire, well be cold.I
noted the temperature last night. It should not be harmful to
you.No...but itll be uncomfortable.Steve grinned. Dont worry about it. I
just hope it doesnt rain.I suggest we walk up to the village. The sun
will not go down right away. Maybe we can buy some additional bedclothes
for you.Okay.Steve glanced up. The sky had more clouds than before, but
he did not smell rain.They walked back up to the village and strolled
through the streets. Hunter found a stall selling furs and bargained
down the price on a coverlet of rabbit pelts stitched together. Steve
slung it over his shoulder gratefully.Hunter noted when the other green
recruits in the village left again. He and Steve followed them back to
the camp, where the campfires now burned. Some men passed bread to each
squad; pots of mut ton already boiled over the fires. A brisk breeze
blew across the twilit countryside.9As Steve and Hunter sat down around
their campfire, Cynric finally introduced each squad member by name. In
the gathering darkness, he directed one of the men to ladle mutton out
of the pot into wooden bowls already filled with chunks of
bread.Cynric,said a young man named Cai. What will we do tomorrow? More
of the same?More of the same.Cynric looked around the group sternly. You
have much to learn before you can keep an angry Saxon from killing
you.Will it be different when the veterans arrive?Cai asked. Will we
ride with them?Our troop will remain together,said Cynric. Lucius will
lead us. When the veterans first begin to gather, they will not bother
to ride, except on their own. Once the bulk of them have arrived, we
will practice maneuvers with them.When will we go out on campaign?A
taller young man named Cadoc looked up from his bowl.No one can be
sure,said Cynric. It depends on what word Artorius hears from scouts and
returning veterans. He wont plan a campaign until he knows something
about the enemy.None of them spoke.You can be sure were going
somewhere,Cynric added. Spring always brings a new campaign for
Artorius. You need not doubt that.The other men nodded.Cai chewed on a
piece of bread for a moment and glanced at Steve. Ive never seen a man
of your appearance before, yet you speak our language well. How did you
two come to join us here today?Its a long story,Steve said cautiously.
He was not sure how much detail Cai wanted.We met in Gaul,said Hunter
casually. My wife and I hail from Linnuis, but we fled the Saxons on
board ship across the Channel.I have known men from Gaul,said Cadoc.
None looked liked you, Steve.I come from the eastern end of the Roman
Empire,said Steve. He glanced at Hunter, who watched him silently. Steve
decided he was free to improvise. I traveled to Gaul as a servant to
another horse breeder. We met Hunter and I began working for him,
instead.But where is this land you come from?Cai asked. My grandfather
served allover the empire and told me stories about his travels. Do you
come from Egypt? Judea? The Parthian border?Steve looked at Hunter
again.His family comes from farther east than that,said Hunter. From
Sina, the land of silk.Never heard of it,said Cynric. Not that I care.He
looked into the distance, where the sun had gone down. A faint glow over
the horizon still lit the sky. Well, men, shall we take our nightly
stroll through the village?You walk through the village every
night?Hunter asked. Why?Cynric grinned. For a goblet of mead, maybe. Or
to meet a woman in a tavern. Maybe just for a walk. It keeps these young
farmers and shepherds in the saddle during the day, when they know they
have a visit in the village at night.Steve caught Hunters eye. Well join
you.Hunter, you can see your wife.Perhaps,said Hunter. First, we have
business in the village. A certain friend of ours may live in the
village now. We will look for him.As you wish.Cynric shrugged.As the
squad walked back up to the village, Steve noticed that the other squads
were doing the same. Not everyone went, however; a few others stayed
around their fires. Some of the men had already stretched out in their
bedrolls.The streets of the village had only a few people, just as the
night before. Cynric sought out the most crowded tavern, though, calling
out to friends he found there.Hunter and Steve bought mead in dented
metal goblets and stood among talkative, laughing men in the middle of
the crowd. Steve saw that Hunter was looking around, so he did not
bother; Hunters height advantage and better vision meant that he could
do the job better and faster, anyway.Steve found the mead interesting at
first, but not really to his liking. He held the goblet and glanced back
out the open doorway. A small group of other men sauntered past.Hunter
continued looking around the crowd. Steve slipped away from him through
the crowd, moving toward the door. The noise in the tavern covered his
footsteps. With a glance over his shoulder at Hunters back, he set his
goblet down on a small table and stepped back outside. He hurried down
the street.After the five earlier missions, Steve no longer worried
about changing history through ordinary actions. He did not believe that
he would alter the fate of Britain or the shape of Arthurian legend by
getting away from Hunter for a few minutes to explore the taverns on his
own. At the same time, he knew he would feel more free to act
spontaneously without Hunter.Steve followed the men in front of him into
another tavern. This place had about half the crowd of the last one, but
the patrons here were also cheerful and talkative. Steve moved to the
bar and ordered more mead. When he turned, he found almost every man in
the place looking at him.Slowly the tavern grew quiet.Steve looked from
face to face. For the first time, he realized that Hunters company had
protected him. No matter how curious or hostile the Britons had felt,
none had confronted him in front of Hunter. The squad members had asked
their questions politely. Now he was on his own.A young man with
shoulder-length, reddish-blond hair smirked at him over a goblet.Steve
decided to take the initiative. Good evening,he said pleasantly.So it
is, stranger.The other man snickered. Who are you, then? Some Pict from
the wilds up north?Ha!Another man sneered. I say hes a wild man from
across the western sea.I came from Gaul,said Steve, forcing a
smile.Youre no Gaul,said the first man. But you speak our language.
Whats your name, then?Steve.Eh? What kind of name is that?Well, its
short for Steven,Steve said lamely. Whats your name?I heard of a Stephen
who followed Jesus,said another man, quietly.Whats your name?Steve asked
the blond man again, still trying to sound cheerful.The man ignored his
question. You were named for this Stephen?It was the origin of my
name,Steve said hesitantly. He had been named after a relative in the
immediate sense. More importantly, he realized that the men around him
really wanted to know something about him. He would have to speak up to
satisfy them.You are a follower of the Church, then.The blond man cocked
his head to one side, studying Steves face.Yes.Steve did not know if
Britain in this time had different denominations or sects, so he said
nothing more. He also could not tell exactly what opinion the others
might hold about this.What is your purpose here?My friend and I have
joined the troop of new recruits,said Steve.Thats true,a man called from
the back. I saw him riding back through the gate with a big, tall
fellow.The blond man smiled, finally. I am Bedwyr. I lead a scouting
patrol.Really? Do you live here year-round?Steve felt a wave of relief
at his friendlier tone.Bedwyr slapped him on the shoulder. Forgive our
questions, friend. Artorius will lead us all out on campaign soon, but
we are getting restless.Steve glanced around. Not all of the other men
had accepted his presence; some still eyed him suspiciously. However, no
one else spoke.Something wrong, friend?Ive only seen a few taverns in
your village. How about showing me around a little?Bedwyr laughed. Why,
sure.He threw back his head and emptied his goblet. Come on, lets
go.Steve took another swig of his mead and set his goblet down. As he
followed Bedwyr out of the tavern, he was glad to see that no one else
joined them. He did not feel that he had been made welcome, exactly, but
being treated with indifference was good enough.Bedwyr started up the
street, pointing to another small building with flickering candles in
the window. Thats a good place for food,he said. Not so much for
drinking.Tell me something,said Steve, falling into step next to him.
Youre the only one who seemed to think my joining Artorius meant
something. The others still arent so friendly. Whats different about
you?You mean, regarding you?Bedwyr shrugged. I spoke up first because I
was the most curious about you. And Artorius needs every good man he can
get.So I have heard.The Saxons dont ride, but they come across the
Channel like endless packs of wolves. Any man who will face them is all
right with me. But you must understand that in these times, not everyone
loves a stranger.Yes, I do.Enough of that.Bedwyr pointed up in the
moonlight toward the palace as they walked. My barracks lie there, in
the citadel. You cant see it well in the darkness, but all of Artoriuss
personal troop lives with him in that quarter. We are sworn to die for
him if necessary.Are you in his personal bodyguard?No,said Bedwyr. You
misunderstand. He has a personal household troop of about three hundred,
depending on casualties from time to time. We live here permanently and
accompany him on every trip he takes. His bodyguards are a special group
of only twenty.Steve wanted to get inside the palace somehow to look for
MC 6. However, he did not want to appear too eager for fear of making
Bedwyr suspicious of his motives. He decided to approach the subject
obliquely.How does a new man join the personal troop?Steve asked. To
maintain the number around three hundred, men killed in battle obviously
must be replaced.A mans loyalty must be proven. For instance, my father
died fighting in Artoriuss personal troop when I was young. My mother
sent me when I came of age.So connections are important.Yes, or special
courage and sacrifice on the battlefield.Bedwyr nodded.What about
working in the palace?Steve asked. Artorius must have people who keep
the fires burning and cook the food and clean up.What of it? You came to
fight.Not for me,said Steve. Im looking for a friend. A little guy. Hes
coming here, but I dont know if hes already arrived or not. He wasnt in
Luciuss troop, so I wonder if hes working in the palace.Ah. I understand
now.Bedwyr shrugged. People like that, the servants...I pay no
attention.Who would know? Someone in the palace who hires the servants,
I guess.Yes.Steve waited, hoping Bedwyr would offer to help. When he did
not, Steve decided to ask him outright. Steve only hoped he would not
offend the warrior in some unpredictable way.Could you introduce me to
this person? I would like to ask about my friend.Mm, well, how about
another drink, Steve? Even this little village has more taverns than
weve seen yet.You cant take a stranger to the palace?Bedwyr grinned. You
really want to find this fellow. Does he owe you money?No, no.Steve
laughed. But youre right-finding him is very important to me.Ill talk to
a friend,said Bedwyr slowly. But no promises. Come on.Where are we
going?Well see whos on sentry duty this watch. I know all those
guys.Steve grinned in the darkness. This was progress, at least. In
Bedwyrs company, he couldnt call Hunter directly, but he switched on his
lapel pin so that Hunter could overhear him.How far is it to the
palace?Steve asked.Bedwyr laughed. In this village? Youve seen it.
Nothing is more than a few minuteswalk.Steve knew Hunter would get the
message from that exchange. They walked in silence through the streets.
When they turned a corner, they left the taverns behind.A single torch
burned in a holder over the main entrance to the palace. Two bored
sentries sat on stools, cradling their spears. They looked up with
interest when they heard footsteps approaching.Its Bedwyr,he called out.
And a new friend. Good evening, Aetius. Wake up, Drustan.They both
grinned. What are you doing here, Bedwyr? The taverns are still open.My
friend Steve, here, now rides under Lucius. He seeks a friend who may be
in the palace.Drustan frowned. He cant go inside at this hour. In the
morning, maybe.I dont need to go inside,said Steve. My friend is called
MC 6.Strange name,said Bedwyr.He may have taken another on his travels.
Maybe I could describe him to you. Hes a little guy, slender and about
so high.Steve held his hand at MC 6s height. He probably doesnt talk
much, but hes very agreeable. If you tell him to do something, he just
does it. And he never hurts anybody-he wont fight, but hell try to stop
a fight between other people. Have you seen him?The sentries looked at
each other.Well, theres little Patricius,said Drustan. Hes only
twelve.Im looking for a grown man,said Steve. Just a little one.Medrauts
not too big,said Aetius. But hes no stranger. Hes Artoriuss nephew.One
of the cooks caught him scrapping with another young rascal
yesterday,said Drustan. Medraut picks fights all the time.You sure hes
that little?Aetius asked. Maybe hes gotten his growth since you saw him
last.Well...it was only a few months ago.I fear we havent seen anyone
like that,said Drustan. We would notice, I think. But maybe he works in
the village somewhere.Maybe so. Thank you.Steve sighed. Hunter had
certainly heard the entire exchange. MC 6 probably had not returned to
full size yet. Bedwyr, shall we visit another tavern? Ill buy.Not so
fast,said Drustan, grinning. Artorius has been coming out for a quick
walk every evening. He may come out any minute.You mean I could meet
him?If he walks out in the same mood as usual, hell have no objection.
He likes to mix with the men this time of year, as the campaign season
approaches.I think Ill hang around.Steve laughed. You mind, Bedwyr?Not
at all. Ill linger with you. It cant hurt to have a good word with the
man at the top.10Back in the hut, Jane helped Ygerna prepare another pot
of mutton stew. At first, Ygerna had tried to dissuade her guest, but
Jane had simply laughed lightly and picked up a knife to cut meat.
Ygerna baked more bread and carefully seasoned the new stew with the sea
salt Emrys had brought from the village.Ishihara had gone outside to cut
more firewood in the twilight. Emrys stacked the pieces. Wayne
alternately paced outside restlessly and sat on a stool inside the hut.
The children, now growing accustomed to their visitors, paid less
attention to them.As she cut chunks of mutton, Jane tried to decide how
to proceed. Now that she knew Hunter and Steve had joined the troop of
riders, she could try to get their attention. On the other hand, Wayne
and Ishihara surely knew she hoped to do that. When they went to the
village tomorrow, she expected Ishihara would become even more attentive
to her than usual to prevent her from escaping. Her greatest fear was
that Wayne would leave her here with Ishihara. Then she would have no
chance.Wayne and Ishihara came inside the hut, followed by Emrys. Jane
glanced up but said nothing. Emrys closed the door behind him.Shall I
tell Jane?Ishihara asked Wayne.Might as well.Wayne shrugged.I have
spoken with Emrys about tomorrow,said Ishihara. Based on the number of
ewes pregnant in his flock, he has decided to take more sheep to the
village tomorrow. We will go with him to look for MC 6.Okay.Jane
shrugged, feigning indifference. Actually, she was deeply relieved.
Apparently they were going to take her; that meant she might have a
chance to get away.When the main doors of the palace opened, Steve
tensed with excitement. Six men came out, wearing now-familiar plain
wool tunics and leather boots and leggings; a servant inside closed the
doors again. Both sentries stood up alertly.The man in front smiled at
the sentries. Good evening, men. Did I wake you?Drustan and Aetius both
laughed and shook their heads, their admiration for him evident in their
faces.No, sir, Riothamus,said Drustan. Not us.Well, I know this is
boring duty. I did my turns on watch when I was young.Steve tried to get
a good look at Artorius Riothamus in the flickering torchlight. He
seemed to be in his early thirties, of average height and a medium
build. His shoulder-length hair was light brown, as was the narrow,
neatly clipped beard along his jawline.Good evening, sir,said Bedwyr
politely. He, too, looked fascinated.Good evening to you.Artorius looked
at him in the uneven torchlight. Ah, Bedwyr, isnt it? You lead one of
the scouting patrols.Thats right, sir.Artorius looked at Steve. I dont
believe I know you, friend.I, uh-This is Steve, a man from the eastern
end of the Roman Empire,said Bedwyr. He and a friend from Linnuis have
joined Luciuss troop.Ah! Im glad to hear it. Welcome, Steve.Thank
you,Steve said shyly.Have you and your friend ridden before? Can you sit
a horse?Yes, sir.Good.Artorius laughed lightly and gave Steve a pat on
the shoulder as he passed. We need you.He and his entourage walked on
down the street.Steve turned to watch him go. Artorius was personable
and unpretentious, but he also came across as reserved, confident, and
supportive of his men. Steve liked him and realized that this personal
magnetism, combined with his military successes, helped create the
legend that grew after his death.Still ready for another drink?Bedwyr
asked him cheerfully.Sure.Harriet had accepted the invitation of
Gwenhyvaer, the young woman she had befriended, to her small room. She
had recognized the name as the original Welsh from which the more
modernGuineverehad been derived. Now a fire burned brightly in a stone
fireplace; candles lit the corners of the room. The two women sat on
each side of the stone hearth, with fur lap-robes keeping their legs
warm.Gwenhyvaer was stitching the hem of a gown by the firelight.
Watching her, Harriet decided that Gwenhyvaer was even younger than
Harriet had first thought. Most likely, she was still in her late teens,
which made her an adult in this culture.How many children do you
have?Gwenhwyvaer asked, glancing up from her sewing.Uh-none.Because she
and Hunter had not discussed that question, she was caught
unprepared.No?Gwenhwyvaers eyes widened in surprise.Harriet shrugged,
suppressing a smile. No.Oh, my. Did they...I mean, did they die young?
Or you never had any?I never had any.Thats so sad. How does your husband
feel about this? Doesnt he want sons?We no longer worry about it,said
Harriet. Its all right.I hope I have children who grow up.Gwenhyvaer
smiled shyly. My father says Artorius likes me. Hes hoping to arrange
for us to be married.Harriet smiled at her youthful embarrassment. You
must love him.She giggled. Every woman I know does, I think. At least,
the younger ones.Has your father been with Artorius long?Oh, yes. Hes
been advising him on Roman cavalry tactics. My father is part Roman. He
served in the legions in Gaul until about ten years ago. So did his
father, before the legions left Britain. He was stationed up by Hadrians
Wall, on the Pictish border.I see. You come from a long line of
soldiers.Gwenhwyvaer nodded soberly. The men will be going on campaign
soon. My grandfather died in a battle. I wish my father would stay
home.He still rides with Artorius, then?Yes.She sighed. But of course he
needs my father. The Saxons keep coming and coming. Father says Artorius
must ride out and fight them on their land, not wait for them to march
here.Harriet stifled a yawn and glanced at the sleep pallet that
servants had prepared for her. With the fire nearby, and using the fur
lap-robe as a coverlet, she would be warm here tonight. For now,
however,. she would stay up talking as late as her hostess
wished.Looking at Gwenhwyvaer, Harriet thought to herself that this
teenager could not possibly ever imagine the kind of role she would play
in Arthurian legend, fictional though it would become-or across how many
centuries she would be remembered, at least in some form.Jane found the
morning routine at the hut the same as the day before. Everyone at the
hut ate breakfast and Emrys picked out which sheep he would drive to the
village. The only difference, as Emrys drove the cart behind the small
flock again, was that he did not take any more firewood. Jane guessed
that his family had no more wood to spare. Without the need to load the
cart, they left earlier than they had yesterday.On the way, Jane watched
the main gate of the tor ahead, to see the troop of riders again. This
time, however, the riders did not leave before Emrys brought his small
flock and the cart up to the gate. As they started up the steep, cobbled
road to the village, Jane saw the riders gather around some sort of
storage building and the paddock, saddling their horses and leading them
toward the gate. She could not see Hunter and Steve in the crowd, so she
assumed they were inside the building.I want to ask Emrys to
stop,Ishihara said suddenly to Wayne. Do I have your permission?Of
course,said Wayne.Jane tensed.Steve stood behind Hunter just inside the
tack building, waiting in line to pick up their saddles and bridles.
They had just finished a bland but plentiful breakfast of hot cereal;
Hunter identified wheat and barley in it. Then they had walked down the
slope, where Hunter had picked up his leather armor from the armorer and
laced it on.Steves arms and shoulders were sore from the unaccustomed
exercise the previous day.Hunter, by the time this is over, Ill be in
great shape.He grinned and moved up with the line. Do you think we
should stay with the troop even though MC 6 isnt in it?He lowered his
voice. Maybe we could try for duty in the village, to be nearer the
palace.Hunter turned, looking over Steves head out the open door behind
them.What is it?Silence, please,Hunter said quietly.Steve waited
patiently, though other men continued to talk around them. Horses
snorted and their hooves clopped outside. Steve guessed that Hunter was
attempting to sort out some other sound, but he had no idea what it
could be.Come outside with me,said Hunter. He left the line and moved
back toward the door. The men behind him made room for him and Steve
followed closely.What is it?Steve asked quietly.I heard the footstep
pattern of Wayne Nystrom nearby.Yeah?Suddenly excited, Steve hurried out
the door after him. Jane must be close.Hunter stopped abruptly. Steve
did, too, when he saw Wayne simply walking right up to them with a
smirk. He seemed to be alone.Wheres Jane?Steve demanded.Dont worry. You
know Ishihara cant allow any harm to come to her.Yeah? Hes not here to
protect you.Angrily, Steve took a step toward him. Before he took a
second step, however, he felt Hunter take his upper arm from behind and
hold him firmly in place.Stop,Hunter added calmly.Where is she?Steve
demanded again.Why have you approached us?Hunter asked. Do you have
something to say?I certainly do.Wayne grinned. Lets negotiate a
little.On what basis?Ive been here a week. Thats given me time to start
a routine here, to get settled. And to make a few friends. Im not
desperate here, as I was in Roman Germany.You say youve been here a
week,said Steve. Does that mean you sent Jane and Ishihara somewhere
else?No comment,said Wayne, snickering. But I remind you that Ishihara
follows my instructions. I intend to hold Jane hostage in return for MC
6, if you should find him before I do. And he must be untouched and
unexamined.I understand your terms,said Hunter.You cant just accept
that,Steve said hotly, looking up at him.I cannot endanger Jane,said
Hunter. You know that, of course.Ill give you some time to think about
it,said Wayne. But I warn you not to follow me to find anyone. If we
have to jump through time to get away from you, I may not make an offer
like this again.Acknowledged,said Hunter.Wayne, still smiling
triumphantly, turned and hurried away through the crowd of men and
horses.11Grab him,said Steve, pulling against Hunters unbreakable grip.
We can hold him as a hostage for Jane. You can call Ishihara and tell
him. Ishihara cant let either of them come to harm, so hed have to give
in.I do not dare,said Hunter. I have no indication of where they are.
Wayne may have left them in another time or in a place out of range of
my signal. He may have left Ishihara with standing instructions or First
Law interpretations that would cloud the First Law imperative to release
Jane. Making an attempt could simply anger Wayne and cause him to
withdraw his offer.Well, whats wrong with that?Maintaining negotiations
will provide Wayne with an incentive to stay in contact with us. If Jane
is nearby, we may eventually be able to track him back to her, or at
least surmise her general vicinity.Well...Steve tried to think of
another objection, but could not. How about calling Ishihara anyway, and
trying to get him to release her?Have you forgotten? I have continued to
call Ishihara at intervals ever since we arrived. He has not
responded.Oh, yeah. But we could just follow Wayne now and find out
whatever we can.I dare not. Besides, the troop is about to go out on
maneuvers, remember?We dont have to stay.Leaving so soon will complicate
our ongoing presence here. We must maintain our place in the troop for
now.Hunter turned, drawing Steve with him. We must get our saddles and
bridles. Again, we will be among the last to ride out.Yeah, all
right.Steve joined him at the end of the line again. So you think
Ishihara has Jane in some other time?Hunter released his arm. That is
not my first estimate. I acknowledge the possibility because it prevents
me from acting too rashly, but I doubt the likelihood. Ishihara would
probably insist on remaining in the company of both humans to protect
them.He wasnt with Wayne right now,said Steve. And in the past, youve
been willing to take a chance on one of your educated guesses.I wish to
prioritize caution at the moment. I believe Ishihara and Jane are
probably fairly close. They may be in the village or out in the
countryside, but I could not hear or see any sign of them. If we bide
our time, I may pick up some clue to their location. Then we can act
more aggressively.But youre still just guessing.I am making a
calculation of the odds.Uh, right.Hunter said nothing for a moment. When
he spoke again, he lowered his voice. Harriet just called to say she is
well. She remains with the women in the palace.Good. Thats something in
our favor.They picked up their saddles and bridles and carried them out
to their mounts.Jane sat in the back of the cart up in the village, near
the palace doors. Emrys haggled over the sheep with the same man as the
day before. From here inside the walls, she could not see the slope or
exactly where Wayne had gone, but she could guess. Ishihara and Wayne
had conferred in whispers before Wayne hopped out and Emrys drove up to
the palace to sell his sheep.She knew that Ishihara must have told Wayne
something about the location of Hunter and Steve. Because she had not
seen or heard any sign of them, she supposed Ishiharas enhanced hearing
had brought him their voices in the distance. She had no real optimism
that she could talk Ishihara into changing sides, but she decided to try
raising some doubts again.The First Law was never intended for
situations like this,Jane said quietly.What do you mean?Ishihara asked.
I have kept you from harm.Youre keeping me prisoner. I would be safer
with Hunter. You already know that. I say you are violating the First
Law by holding me now that Hunter has arrived.What form of harm are you
suffering?Im being harmed simply by having to stay with you. Its not my
choice.Wayne Nystrom will be harmed if his career is destroyed. I intend
to balance his concerns with yours. Neither of you will suffer direct
physical harm.Think about the intention of the First Law. Do you really
believe that kidnapping was included?To prevent a human from being
harmed, it has been an option throughout the history of positronic
robots. Otherwise, it would have been explicitly prohibited.I say you
are wrong, Ishihara. Think about it.Jane spoke firmly but did not feel
encouraged. Wayne had obviously given Ishihara some effective arguments
of his own at some point and, after all, Wayne was also a
roboticist.Hunter found the maneuvers today to be a repeat of the day
before. He put most of his effort into avoiding injuring his opponents.
While he remained close to Steve, he observed that Steve learned very
quickly and did not need specific help.The day wore on uneventfully.
Finally, late in the afternoon, Lucius ordered the troop back to the
tor. When the weapons, armor, tack, and horses had been put away, Hunter
and Steve walked back up to the village.Steve looked up at him,
grinning. The trouble with this stuff is, the more time I spend riding
and fighting, the more tired I get. The more time you spend out in the
sunlight, the more energy you draw from your converters. Imagine what an
army of robots could do here.We could not fight humans,said Hunter. We
would be useless as an army.I was just speculating. Think about it-It
makes me uncomfortable to consider it,Hunter said abruptly.All right.
Sorry.Harriet called me again just now. She and one of the women she has
met have gone for a walk in the village. We will look for them.Okay.In
the village, Hunter saw Harriet standing with a much younger woman by a
stall that sold crockery. Before he and Steve reached them, however,
Bedwyr walked out of the crowd, munching on a piece of bread. Steve had
introduced him to Hunter last night before they had returned to the
camp.Well, Hunter, how do you like your training?Bedwyr turned to Steve.
You have no broken bones, I see.No, we are fine,said Hunter.Come with
us,said Steve. Were going to speak to a friend. Well introduce
you.Bedwyr fell into step with them.Harriet!Steve called
cheerfully.Harriet turned and waved.Thats your friend?Bedwyrs eyebrows
rose. Shes with Gwenhyvaer.Did you say Guinevere?Steve asked in
surprise.You say it oddly,said Bedwyr. If you know the name, though, you
must have heard. Rumor says Artorius will make her queen.Shes just a
kid,Steve muttered.She has her growth.Bedwyr laughed. Not too young to
become a queen, eh?You know her?Only by sight.When they reached the
stall, Harriet introduced Gwenhyvaer to Hunter and Steve. In turn, Steve
introduced them both to Bedwyr. Gwenhyvaer nodded primly to them all and
turned back to the crockery.We met Bedwyr in the village last night,said
Steve. We drank together.We wont see many taverns on the campaign,said
Bedwyr, grinning.Are you from this area?Harriet asked. I wondered what
its like. Were from Linnuis.Yes, my village is not far. Half a days
ride. Life is good there. But we must send good men to ride with
Artorius, or else the Saxons will have it all.Would you tell me about
your village? Really tell me, I mean.As you wish, of course. I doubt its
much different from your own.Lets sit down somewhere and visit,said
Steve. What do you say, Hunter? After all that riding today, Id like to
relax.You go on,Gwenhyvaer said to Harriet. After I browse some more, Im
going back to the palace. Ill remind the sentries to let you in.All
right.I have no objection,said Hunter.Wayne encouraged Emrys to leave
the village at midday, while Hunter and Steve remained on maneuvers with
the troop. He did not know for sure if Hunter would cooperate with his
demands or not. However, he told Ishihara to keep a careful watch behind
them as the cart left the tor, and Ishihara reported no sign that Hunter
or Steve had followed them.In the late afternoon, Emrys left the hut to
hike back to his son, tending the main flock. Wayne waited until Jane
used the outhouse and was out of hearing. Then he approached Ishihara
and spoke quietly.Hunter almost certainly spotted us leaving the
tor,said Wayne. He will know which direction we took. What do you think
the chances are that he will risk trying to rescue Jane instead of
catching MC 6 and trading him to me?He has a great deal of room for
interpretation of the First Law in this case,said Ishihara. However, I
believe that my presence gives him the freedom to move slowly.I think
so, too. Without you, he would feel he had to rescue Jane right away
because I cant protect her effectively alone. You can.Yes. Given that
Hunter knows I must keep Jane from harm, he does not have to come for
her immediately.When I spoke to Hunter, I got the impression that he
accepted my terms,said Wayne. Hell consider trading MC 6 to me for Jane.
But I have to ask if youll allow it. I dont know of any interpretation
of the First Law that will cause you to prevent this deal. Do you?No. As
long as I protect you and Jane until the time that she is released
directly to Hunters care, I can cooperate with you in this.Good.I must
offer another interpretation of Hunters moves, however.What?Hunter may
not worry about Jane further, since he knows I must take care of her. He
may just get MC 6 and forget about dealing with you for her.You think he
can do that under the First Law?Wayne frowned, gazing out over the cool,
gray sky in the distance over Cadbury Tor.Perhaps. I cannot be certain.
However, since MC 6 is the only component robot remaining at large,
Hunter knows you will have no further interest in Jane if he simply
takes MC 6 back to our time.You mean hell figure you and I will just
return, too, and let Jane go.He knows I cannot allow harm to come to
Jane. That may free him to ignore your deal entirely.Wayne drew in a
long, slow breath and let it out again. I must proceed on the assumption
that the First Law will pressure him to act more aggressively toward
Jane. To that end, I may instruct you to remain here with Jane while I
return to Cadbury. Will this be acceptable under your interpretation of
the First Law?I do not like separating from you. I must protect you, as
well.In the absence of a clear danger under the First Law, you should
have no problem. Cadbury will be safe for me. Do you agree?Yes.Ishihara
lowered his voice. If you wish this to remain private, we must change
the subject. Jane is coming back.Hunter sat down in a small tavern with
Bedwyr, Harriet, and Steve. Harriet asked Bedwyr many detailed questions
about life in his village; Hunter could hear the historian behind her
questions. Steve listened politely, sipping from a goblet of mead,
sprawled back in his seat comfortably.A bell began to ring loudly,
clearly, and rhythmically outside. Bedwyr promptly put his goblet down
on the table and got up. Then he looked in surprise at the others, who
had not moved.The other patrons in the tavern, and the tavern-keeper,
hurried out the door.Its the village bell,he said. Arent you coming?
Important news must have come.Steve started to get up.No,said Hunter,
gently placing a hand on Steves arm. Please inform us of the news.As you
wish.Bedwyr shrugged and hurried out of the tavern.Outside, Hunter heard
many feet from allover the village moving quickly up and down the
streets.Whats wrong, Hunter?Steve asked.The three of us have not had a
chance to confer freely for some time,said Hunter. We can talk now and
find out what the news is later.Well, what do you want to talk
about?Steve set down his goblet.If MC 6 has not returned to full size,
or if we cannot find any clue to his location, Steve and I may have to
consider leaving the troop we have joined. If we do, I judge that we
cannot expect to be welcome in the village any longer. Is this
accurate?Yes, if you just quit or disappear,said Harriet thoughtfully.
No army tolerates deserters, though in this time, organization is not
very formal. Quitting now probably would mean that you would simply not
be welcome back. Deserting on campaign, however, is likely a hanging
offense. But I wonder if you can arrange to be reassigned to garrison
duty here in the tor.Is that likely?Hunter asked.No. New arrivals are
not likely to be trusted. But I can ask Gwenhyvaer if she can help.If we
go out on campaign, we could be wasting valuable time,said Hunter. But
suppose this is necessary. Will you be safe here?Yes. Gwenhyvaer seems
to like me. And if my husband has gone out to fight with Artorius, I
will look better to everyone in the palace.I asked a couple of sentries
last night if they had seen anyone of MC 6s description in the
palace,said Steve. I guess if youd heard anything like that, you would
have said so already.Yes, I would have.Harriet shook her head. MC 6 may
not be in the palace, though. He could be working in the village during
the day and either spending the night hidden away in the village or out
in the countryside nearby.He could still be microscopic,said Hunter. We
are searching in a relatively small area with a modest population. If he
had returned to full size and had remained in the village, we should
have found someone who has seen him by now.We havent offered a reward
here, like we have before,said Steve.I can do that,said Harriet. If I
remain here to cover the village, then you can see if he appears with
the riders at some point.You seem very comfortable here,said
Hunter.Hunter, I might as well tell you something,said Harriet slowly.
As I mentioned before, I do not believe in chaos theory at all. Im
willing to fulfill my commitment to you in finding MC 6, but then I want
to stay in this time.Forever?Steve sat up in his chair, startled. Are
you crazy?Maybe.Harriet smiled. But I used to dream about living in this
time-the focus of my professional research. And when Hunter told me
about the mission to travel back in time, I knew I wanted to do it.You
accepted this job with the intention of staying here?Hunter asked.Yes. I
admit it. But I waited to make my final decision until after I had seen
what my prospects would be. Since I have the advantage of hindsight, I
can use it to improve my chances. For instance, I know before Gwenhyvaer
and Artorius themselves that they will marry. I intend to position
myself as a mentor and friend to her. After my husband disappears, maybe
in battle against the Saxons, I will be an honored widow. I hope she
will accept me as a personal servant.Hunter said nothing. On the second
mission, which took the team to Jamaica in the seventeenth century to
capture MC 2, he had hired a historian named Rita Chavez. Rita had
decided to go out on her own only on impulse, after the team had arrived
there. Her leaving the team had endangered the mission, but she had
eventually changed her mind and returned to the team. Harriet remained
willing to fulfill her duties, apparently, but she seemed to have made a
much more calm and studied decision not to return to their own time.Have
you really thought this through?Steve demanded. What kind of doctors do
they have here? What happens if you get sick, or get hurt?Yes, Ive
thought it through. Im not one to romanticize this era-if anything, I
know it better than most people from our time.Before we left, you said
this was a time of social and political transition,said Hunter. The
border between the Britons and the Saxons fluctuates. Why do you want to
live in a time that is so unstable?In terms of scholarly study, this
time is unstable. Very little from these years will last for as long as
another century, when the Saxons conquer and settle throughout all of
what will become England. But for one middle-aged woman like me, life in
a village far from the military front will be very routine, day in and
day out.What will you do when the Saxons come?Steve frowned. That time
cant be very routine.Again, Im using the advantage of historical
hindsight. The efforts of Artorius and his men will hold off the Saxons
for the rest of my lifetime. My presence wont change that. Even under
the worst circumstances, Ill be gone before the Saxons reach this
area.Hunter did not respond. The First Law required him to take Harriet
back both for her own safety and because of his own belief in chaos
theory. The harm to her in returning would be virtually nonexistent, yet
in his opinion, the potential harm to the future if she stayed remained
very large. If necessary, he would take her back under duress, and he
did not want to tell her that; she might decide to run away, as Rita
had. In any case, this matter would have to wait until the team was
ready to leave this time again.From the R. Hunter FilesThe now-famous
prototype of the highly successful Hunterclass robot first demonstrated
his remarkable abilities in the Mojave Center Governor case. The
following images are drawn from the Robot City archives of Derec Avery,
the eminent robotics historian.R. Hunters different incarnations. The
Hunter robot is able to assume different forms, including those pictured
here: human form, standard robot mode, and full battle array.MC robots
merged. The final independent component of MC Governor is captured by R.
Hunter in the distant past and merged with the remaining five.The Bohung
Institute. A security robot patrols the Institutes perimeter.MC Governor
confronts R. Hunter. Following MC Governors capture and reintegration,
R. Hunter confronts him in his office.King Artorius. Flanked by R.
Hunter and Steve, the king prepares for battle.Cadbury Castle. The
primary base of Artoriuss men, this castle is the basis of the Camelot
legend.Medical Robot. R. Cushing, the medical robot that provided
vaccinations and treatments for R. Hunters team for all their
journeys.Room F-12. The time travel apparatus used by both R. Hunter and
his teams and Wayne Nystrom and R. Ishihara to chase MC Governor is
guarded by R. Daladier and another security robot, in the event that
Nystrom returns.Observing the Saxon soldiers. Bedwyr joins R. Hunter and
Steve in observing the movements o f the Saxon troops.12Bedwyr ran back
into the tavern, out of breath. Behind him, Hunter could see other
people running through the street. Shouts came from allover the
village.What is it?Steve asked, looking up.A scouting patrol just came
back from the Saxon border.Bedwyr paused to catch his breath. A new
fleet of Saxons has crossed the Channel. With their brethren already in
Britain, they are preparing to march soon.What will Artorius do?Hunter
asked.He already came out to speak. Thats why the bell rang. He has
issued orders for us to march tomorrow.Most of his army is not here,said
Hunter.Thats right,said Bedwyr. His personal troop and Luciuss green
recruits are the only ones. But couriers are being sent to the
countryside to tell all the veterans to meet us on our line of march.Can
they arrive in time?Steve asked.Of course.Bedwyr laughed. Remember, we
are all mounted. The Saxons march on their own sorry feet. We will
gather long before we meet them.When do we leave?Hunter asked.
Tonight?No, no. Attack is not imminent, only the need to open the
campaign. The baggage train must be assembled and that work will go on
late into the night. In the morning, we will ride.Hunter turned to
Harriet. Will you be welcome in the palace indefinitely? If not, we must
find another place for you. We should begin now.Ill talk to Gwenhyvaer
about it right away,said Harriet, standing. She must have heard the
bell, too. I imagine the whole palace is buzzing.What about us?Steve
asked Bedwyr. Do we have to report to the camp right away?Of course
not!Bedwyr laughed and sat down in his chair again. Every man not on
sentry duty will be coming to the taverns soon! Its our last night of
freedom! Now wheres that tavernkeeper-still out in the street?Jane knelt
by the fire, setting out bowls on the hearth. Just as Ygerna began to
ladle mutton stew into the bowls, hoofbeats sounded outside. Emrys and
Ishihara went out into the twilight to see who was coming. Wayne
remained on a stool near the door, which was left ajar.Ygerna paid no
attention as she ladled out the stew. Jane feigned disinterest but
listened carefully. A single horse cantered right up to the front of the
hut.Does anyone here ride with Artorius?An unfamiliar mans voice called
out.No,said Emrys. Why?Artorius rides tomorrow! Spread the word to
anyone who rides with him. The Saxons are marching!The hoofbeats
cantered away.Emrys came back inside. At the same moment, Wayne got up
and slipped outside, blocking Ishihara from entering. He closed the door
behind him.I sold my sheep just in time.Emrys grinned. Did you
hear?Artorius rides tomorrow,said Ygerna. Thats good. He will defeat the
Saxons again this year.The other shepherds will have to leave at dawn to
drive their sheep to the tor,said Emrys, coming to take a bowl of stew
from Ygerna. Even then, they may not arrive until after he has left. If
they want to sell their sheep to him after that, they will have to chase
the baggage train.Jane tensed, wondering what this would mean to her. If
Hunter and Steve had to maintain the goodwill of those around them, she
supposed they would have to go. She knew that Wayne was conferring with
Ishihara at that moment about the same question. They would have to
decide what to do and, in particular, what to do with her.The central
issue remained the same as before, the whereabouts of MC 6. If MC 6 went
on campaign with Artorius, then Hunter and Steve would also go. Wayne
could not possibly find out if MC 6 was going before tomorrow, but he
might decide that if Hunter went, he should go.Jane tried to figure out
what Ishihara would do if Wayne decided to follow Artorius. In her
judgment, Ishihara could neither let Wayne follow a troop of riders
going to war alone, nor could he leave Jane here indefinitely.
Therefore, Ishihara would have to take her, too.She still did not know
for sure if Hunter and Steve would go with Artorius or attempt something
else.Early the next morning, Steve sat by the campfire next to Hunter,
eating a bowl of hot cereal. The night before, Hunter had told Steve
that Harriet had called him to report that Gwenhyvaer would give her
lodging for as long as her husband was gone on campaign. Now, everyone
around them spoke excitedly of riding out today. As soon as each squad
had finished breakfast, they put out their fire and hurried to the other
side of the tor to prepare their horses.When Cynric led his squad around
the slope, Steve moved close to Hunter and spoke quietly.You want to
take one more quick walk through the village? If MC 6 isnt going with
Artorius, either microscopically or at full size, we really are wasting
our time.I dare not,said Hunter. We must maintain our standing here.This
time, as the riders lined up to get their tack and their weapons,
teamsters hitched horses to wagons. Baggage handlers loaded spare
weapons and armor into some of them. Some teamsters drove empty wagons
up to the village; others drove loaded wagons back.I see MC 6,said
Hunter softly, looking out over the slope from his place in line.What?
Where?Steve fought to remain calm. Maybe we can get him before we
leave.He is riding in the back of the second wagon coming down the slope
from the village.Yeah, I guess I see him now. I couldnt have recognized
him for sure at this distance.Steve hesitated. Youre sure thats him?Yes.
When we see where the wagon goes, we can decide whether or not to
approach it immediately.You mean, well just grab him right now?Steve
asked in surprise.We should move as soon as we can do so safely and
successfully.But what about Jane? We cant grab MC 6 and just walk away
from here to get her. If we dont jump right back to our own time, well
have to go on campaign. And if thats the case, I dont think we should
alert MC 6 to the fact that were after him.We must take MC 6 immediately
back to their own time, leave him securely in MC Governors office, and
then come back for Jane.What about Waynes threat?Steve asked. He can
order Ishihara away from Jane, so she wont be protected.Our first
responsibility remains returning MC 6 to our own time. Further, I do not
believe that Wayne truly would endanger Jane. I judge him to be a man
who would threaten this in the hope of influencing me under the First
Law, but who would not carry out the threat.Im not so sure.The wagon in
which MC 6 rode pulled up near the main gate of the outer rampart,
behind some other loaded wagons.Were moving to the front of the
line,said Steve. Are we going to get our tack first, or just go now?We
should waste no more time,said Hunter decisively. Come.Hunter stepped
out of the line and angled quickly across the slope, down toward the
loaded wagons. Most of the teamsters sat holding the reins, simply
waiting, but a few of them stood on the ground, adjusting harnesses or
ropes holding cargo.Cant he tell somehow that youre a robot?Steve asked.
Didnt we have to consider this on earlier missions, too? What did we
do?If he studies me with magnified vision or hearing, he will detect
that I do not have human skin or a heartbeat. We must gamble that he
will not bother, since he has no reason to expect another robot here in
this century.Oh, yeah. Thats right.Steve followed Hunter, keeping an eye
on MC 6. The component robot sat in the rear of a wagon watching his
surroundings alertly, but of course he had no idea that Hunter and Steve
had come from their time to get him. He glanced at them casually and
then looked past them, toward the paddock.Since he is not afraid of us,
we can walk right up and speak to him,said Hunter. Give him a direct
instruction to cooperate fully with us.What do we do after we get
him?Steve asked. We dont want to vanish with him in front of these other
people. What should I say?Your second instruction must be to jump down
out of the wagon and come around behind it with us. we will hurry out
the main gate. As soon as we turn the corner and stand out of sight, I
will trigger the belt unit.Got it.Steve glanced at the gate, just on the
other side of the wagon, and looked at MC 6 again.Ho! You there! What do
you want?Steve stopped, startled. Hunter turned in surprise. A tall,
burly man wearing a tanned leather tunic marched up to them. He scowled
through a bushy brown beard.I say, what do you want here?We must have a
moment with this man,Hunter said firmly, gesturing toward MC 6. Who are
you?I am Gaius, the wagonmaster.He glared suspiciously at Hunter. What
do you want with him? He doesnt speak British or Latin. The only way we
can communicate with him is through gestures.We speak his language,said
Hunter.Steve almost called out to MC 6 in English, to order him to
cooperate. He thought better of it, realizing that they might not get a
chance to take MC 6 away from the sight of the wagonmaster. In that
event, he did not want to alert MC 6 to the fact that they had come from
his time to take him back.And I asked, what do you want with him?Before
Hunter could answer, Gaius turned to MC 6. You know these men?He jerked
a thumb toward Hunter.MC 6 looked back and forth between them. He
obviously did not understand the question. He shrugged lightly, shaking
his head.You men get back to your horses,said Gaius angrily. Now. I have
wagons to line up.He moved to block Hunters path to MC 6.Hunter turned
and walked back up the slope. Steve hurried to keep alongside. At least
they had not revealed their true intentions to MC 6.Jane said nothing
about Waynes plans the next morning. She helped Ygerna tend the fire,
waiting to see what Wayne and Ishihara were going to do. They all ate
breakfast, the same hot cereal as every other morning. Then Wayne and
Ishihara stepped outside again, this time with Emrys.The suspense for
Jane finally ended when Ishihara came back inside alone.Emrys will drive
us to the village again today,Ishihara said to Jane. Wayne instructed me
to explain that we must search for an acquaintance there. Emrys
expressed his gratitude again for my help in cutting the firewood and,
by chance, causing him to drive his sheep to sell before his neighbors.
So he will send his eldest son to tend the flock again and help us
today, as well.Jane nodded. She did not want Ishihara or Wayne to know
that she was glad to be going, too. On her way out of the hut, she gave
Ygerna a quick smile and pat on the shoulder. Jane hoped to join Hunter
somehow today, which would mean she would not be back, but of course she
could hardly say so.This time, Emrys did not have firewood to load or
sheep to drive. Ygerna gave them some bread and cold cooked mutton to
take with them, wrapped first in a clean cloth, then put into a heavier
cloth bag. Ishihara lifted Jane into the back of the empty cart, as
before, and climbed in with her. Emrys waited for Wayne to join him in
the front, then shook the reins and started out.Today, other shepherds
with their flocks clogged the road to the tor. Most of them walked, with
a dog or two to drive the sheep. A few others also drove mule carts,
carrying either butchered carcasses or, in some cases, an entire family
going for an outing.Emrys, the only shepherd without sheep or a full
cart, drove a little faster. With a big grin, he waved to some of his
friends as he drew near, calling out greetings occasionally. He drove
off the road to pass them and their flocks, taking the cart over the sod
on one side or the other.Jane watched the tor closely, hoping to arrive
before the riders left the tor. Today, however, they did not make it.
The troop rode out well ahead of their arrival. Instead of breaking
formation to begin maneuvers, however, the troop rode straight out along
a different road, one that angled eastward across the rolling hills.When
she saw they were leaving, she tensed, hoping to spot whether Hunter and
Steve rode with them. She did not see either of them, though she
realized they might be lost in the crowd of riders. However, she decided
that even if she spotted Hunt er by his height, she could not risk
trying to attract his attention from this distance. Hunter might not
hear her and Wayne would get angry at the attempt. She wanted to reserve
her efforts for a move that would work.13Ishihara saw Hunters head and
shoulders towering above his companions, as he rode with the troop away
from the tor, well ahead of Emryss cart. Since Wayne had told him not to
alert Jane unnecessarily to new information regarding Hunter, Ishihara
merely leaned forward between Emrys and Wayne and pointed with one
finger toward the riders. Wayne nodded.After the riders had passed from
the main gate, Ishihara watched a long train of wagons follow the riders
out of the tor and up the road to the east. Over twenty men and women
trudged behind it, failing to keep up. For a while, Ishihara, Wayne, and
Emrys continued to ride in silence. As the cart reached the main gate of
the tor, after the baggage train had moved far up the road, Wayne leaned
close to Ishihara.Who are those people walking behind the wagons?Wayne
asked.I believe they are called camp followers. The women are following
the soldiers and the men are scavengers, hoping to loot the dead after a
battle. As the army marches, more of them will probably see it and
follow, too.Do you agree that we have to follow them all, too?Wayne
whispered. The sound of the mules hooves helped camouflage his voice
from Jane in the back of the cart.Yes,Ishihara whispered back. I judge
that Hunter and Steve would not go on this campaign unless they knew
that MC 6 was also going.How can we arrange to go, too?Ishihara turned
to Emrys.We must ask you for help once again.What is it?We would like to
borrow your wagon,said Ishihara. For a few days, at least. Maybe
more.What do you want with it?We must follow a couple of friends who
have left with Artorius.You want to follow Artorius on campaign? That
will take more than a few days. He could be gone until the leaves turn
in autumn.Wayne could not understand British, so he looked back and
forth between them for a clue to Emryss answer.I can guarantee we will
bring it back as soon as possible,said Ishihara.But I may need it before
you return.Emrys shook his head. You have done me several kindnesses,
but I will need my cart. Maybe we can find another way for you and your
friends to follow Artorius.What do you mean?Ishihara asked.Well, I could
drive you to the baggage train. They always need men to work on the
wagons during a campaign. During the summer, some may go too close to
the battle and get killed; others run away to find something else.What
did he say?Wayne asked.Ishihara switched to English. He wont let us
borrow his wagon. Instead, he suggested that he take us to the baggage
train and we can earn our keep.If Hunter saw us, wed be helpless. He
would take Jane and me.I cannot allow it, anyway. The danger to Jane is
too great in that sort of company.Yeah.Ishihara changed languages again.
We dare not take Jane to the baggage train. We need to find our own
wagon or mounts to ride.I understand,said Emrys. And you want to be able
to return on your own, as well, without having to walk.Yes.Emrys looked
across the slope. Then, without a word, he shook the reins and drove the
cart at an angle up the tor. They left the road leading up to the
village.Ishihara saw the paddock and two other buildings ahead of them.
Only two animals remained in the pen and he supposed they had been left
behind because they were not suitable to ride. He did not see any small
carts similar to Emryss.As Emrys drew up in front of the paddock, a
short, stocky man wearing a ragged leather tunic walked on a wooden
crutch under his left arm from one of the buildings.If you want to sell
something, youre too late,said the man with the crutch. Youll have to
catch up to the baggage train.No, no. We wish to buy,said Emrys. Are you
the master of horse?Of course not.The man scowled. The master of horse
has gone with Artorius. So has the armorer. I am Antonius.He hesitated.
What do you want to buy?A couple of horses,said Ishihara.The price of a
good horse goes up this time of year,said Antonius.Nonsense,said Emrys.
Every good horse has already been taken. You have none at all.Then what
do you want here?I will dicker with the man who can sell,said Emrys. If
you are not the master of horse, who makes the decisions here now?Well,
until Artorius returns, I do.We want two or three mounts to ride on the
road.Just to travel? Not to join the cavalry or to pull a wagon?No.All
right. Come and look.Emrys and Ishihara got down and followed Antonius
into the paddock. Wayne hopped down and watched but did not bother to
enter the pen. Jane stayed where she was.Antonius led Emrys and Ishihara
to a pair of small, brown mules standing quietly. Ishihara noticed their
long ears and white noses. Both animals placidly watched them
approach.Emrys looked over the mules carefully. He patted them and
stroked their legs and necks as he walked around them. Then he examined
their teeth.Finally, Emrys took some coins out of a pouch and held them
out to Antonius.The other man leaned on his crutch and frowned, shaking
his head.Without speaking, Emrys took out one more coin and held it
out.Antonius shook his head again.That is all he is worth,said
Emrys.Antonius said nothing.Emrys dropped the coins back into his pouch
and walked away. Ishihara followed him. Just as they reached the gate of
the paddock, Antonius began hustling after them awkwardly on his
crutch.All right,Antonius called. He is yours.Emrys turned and spilled
the coins carefully into his palm again. He dropped them into Antoniuss
outstretched hand. Then Antonius walked back to the storage building and
came out with an old bridle and a long rope. In the paddock again, he
tossed them to Emrys, who slipped the bridle on one of the mules and
tied the rope to rings on the bridle to use as reins. Then he led the
mule out of the paddock.I ask only that you return it to me when you
come back,said Emrys, holding the reins out to Ishihara.That might not
be possible,said Ishihara, without accepting the reins. If we have to
act quickly, returning it could endanger me.I know the campaign could be
dangerous. Please take care of yourselves.Emrys placed the reins in
Ishiharas hands. You are...unusual friends.Thank you. We shall bring the
mule back if we are able.Ishihara turnedand related this to Wayne,
knowing that Jane could overhear him.All right, but its only one mule
for three of us,said Jane.What else can we do?Ishihara
asked.Nothing,said Wayne. We have no money.Whats wrong with this
mule?Jane demanded.What do you mean?Wayne asked.Why didnt they take him
to ride? Or for the baggage train? Is he old or something?Antonius
explained,said Ishihara. This mule is young and healthy but too small to
put in harness. The warriors disdain riding a mule into battle and they
have enough food, so no one would want to eat it.I have another
suspicion, too,Wayne added, lowering his voice.What?Jane asked,
concerned. Something bad about the mule?No, nothing like that.Wayne
shook his head. Since Antonius is in charge here for now, I think hes
going to pocket the coins Emrys paid him. So if he sells a cavalry mule
and keeps all the profit, hell be happy enough.I am sure that Emrys
cannot buy another,said Ishihara. However, you and Wayne can ride this
one together, bareback. He will tire more quickly than a horse carrying
one rider, but the teams pulling the baggage train will tire quickly,
too. We should be able to catch up tonight after they stop to make
camp.Jane nodded. And youll jog along beside us.Yes.Jane climbed out of
the cart. Emrys handed her the bag of bread and mutton. She accepted
it.Thank you, Emrys,Jane said, in Latin. Farewell.Emrys understood her
meaning, if not the words, and nodded politely.This wont last us very
long,said Jane, turning to Ishihara. What else are we going to eat on
the way? This might last us two small meals, but tomorrow morning, well
be on the road somewhere.If necessary, we can always use the belt unit
to jump to another time and place for food,said Wayne. But if were
lucky, well find MC 6 tonight, get him to come with us, and be done with
the whole mess.All right,said Jane reluctantly. I know you dont want to
starve, either. But now that I think about it, what about getting
through the night? If you dont get MC 6 to follow you tonight, well
freeze out on the road without some kind of bedrolls.We must find
blankets in the village,said Ishihara. However, without money to buy
them, we can only ask for Emrys to help again. I do not know how much
more he will be willing and able to help.Maybe he can afford old ones,
said Jane. Their condition wont matter, as long as they dont have bugs
or anything. Please ask him.Ishihara turned to Emrys again. Can we buy
old, inexpensive blankets in the village? We can return them, too, with
the mule.Of course,said Emrys. I know which booth to visit. I can help
with that. You will need a small pot in which to heat water, too.We will
go to the village,said Ishihara. Then, if our search for blankets
succeeds, we will hurry on our way up the road.Steve enjoyed riding out
with Artoriuss cavalry, in a column of four abreast. He rode on the far
right of his rank, with Hunter on his immediate left and Cynric on
Hunters other side. Another member of their squad rode on the far left,
with the remainder in the ranks behind them.All of Luciuss troop of
green recruits rode in the rear. No dust roiled up, however, because of
the dampness in the earth. Overhead, gray clouds drifted across the
sky.Around him, Steve could see the excitement in the young faces of the
other riders. The thought of going to war against the hated Saxons
dominated their attention. None of them spoke now.Up ahead, as the
column drew away from Cadbury, the squads in the van cantered ahead of
the rest. When the vanguard had opened some distance, the entire column
was ordered to canter. Steve understood and kicked his mount; Artorius,
already a veteran leader, wanted his men to vent their tension.When the
column slowed to a walk again, Steve could see the difference. The
riders around him relaxed, breathless, and began talking and laughing
among themselves. Under the hooves of the horses ahead, the soft road
quickly turned to muddy slop, but no one cared. The road wound east and
sometimes northeast around rolling hills covered with lush green grass;
clumps of trees lined the hollows among the hills.I hear word from up
ahead,said Hunter. A rumor of our destination is slowly passing back
through the column, from one man to another.Well, what is it? Where are
we going?To the River Dubglas in Linnuis,said Hunter. He lowered his
voice and leaned toward Steve, switching to English.According to the
library data I took before we left, that is the Douglas River in modern
Lincolnshire.River Dubglas, you say?Cynric, riding on the far side of
Hunter from Steve, nodded. That sounds right.So I heard,said Hunter.We
fought them by the banks of that river late last season,said Cynric. If
we hope to drive them back this summer, well have to attack their
territory. Last years campaign penned them on the far side of the river,
but I suppose they look to cross it again, with their reinforcements
from across the Channel.His face tightened as he considered this.How
long will we take to reach River Dubglas?Hunter asked.If we ride without
a break to the same site as last years battle, three days. Our scouts
will ride back with word as we draw closer, though, to tell Artorius
exactly where on the river to go. We might spend some time moving up and
down the bank. Artorius will make his final plans according to how many
of our veterans join us quickly.You feel he may order us to wait and
gather his troops before moving into battle?Hunter asked.Anything is
possible. We will find out his plans when we are close enough for our
scouts to bring fresh information.Steve understood the real questions in
Hunters mind, behind his spoken words. Hunter wanted to take Steve away
from the column before any battle began. Ideally, they would find MC 6
and simply return together to their own time before the fighting
started. Now Hunter could estimate that they had a minimum of three days
before Artorius could reach the Saxons.14Wayne and Jane rode the mule.
He held the reins while Jane sat behind him with her arms around his
waist. Even at a walk, the mules long legs moved faster than a humans
legs would walk.Ishihara had to stride quickly to keep up. He moved at a
pace that no human could maintain for long, but of course had no trouble
with it himself. Because the road had been churned to a deep muddy soup
by the horses ahead, Wayne rode through the long grass by the side of
the road.In late morning, they caught up to the camp followers hiking
after the riders. Ishihara led Wayne on a long detour around the camp
followers, far enough to avoid conversation. Then they moved back to the
side of the road again.At midday, Wayne stopped for a break. He and Jane
ate part of their bread and mutton in silence. Then they mounted again
and continued on their journey.Late in the afternoon, Ishihara suddenly
trotted about twenty meters ahead of the mule, then stopped. As Wayne
caught up to him, Ishihara raised a hand for him to halt. Wayne saw that
Ishihara was listening to something.They have stopped to make
camp,Ishihara said finally. The noises are faint, but we will come
within sight of the camp soon. We must decide how to proceed now, before
anyone in the camp sees us.Well...I dont know exactly what to do,said
Wayne. What do you suggest?Ishihara looked up the road, which still
wound through rolling hills ahead. That long line of trees suggests a
river or at least a stream that provides water for Artoriuss camp. We
will need water, too, so we might as well go close enough to see what
the camp looks like.Yeah. Maybe we can see MC 6 from a distance.Wayne
kicked the mule forward.As Wayne passed, Ishihara looked behind him, at
Jane. You are still well?Yeah,Jane muttered.The troops halted to make
camp by a small stream. Hunter saw new scouting patrols ride out,
crossing the stream. He understood that by stopping with plenty of
daylight left, the main column allowed the baggage train time to catch
up before darkness fell.The squads split up and fanned out from the
road. The riders tended their horses first, unsaddling them and hobbling
them to graze. Then the men were ordered to gather firewood to make
separate campfires for the night.Theres dead wood among those live
trees, all over the place,said Steve, glancing at the trees lining the
stream. We dont need everybody to gather it.Every man does his
share,growled Cynric. Come on, you two.Hold it,called Bedwyr, with a big
grin. He walked briskly among the other men and horses toward them. I
have business here, Cynric. How did my green friends fare on their first
day of march?Very well, thank you,said Hunter.You told me you lead a
scouting patrol,said Steve. Do you have any news? We heard a rumor about
going to River Dubglas.Yes, thats right,said Bedwyr. But none of the
patrols today have made contact with the Saxons. Fresh patrols rode out
a few minutes ago, but were still a long way from Linnuis.Steve nodded.I
have a serious reason to speak with you,said Bedwyr. Artorius is worried
about having so many green recruits and so few veterans. The rest of our
veterans should join us during the next day or so, but he wants to mix
some quick-witted new recruits with his veterans to give them some
experience. I want you two to join my patrol.Really?Steve grinned but
glanced uncertainly at Hunter. That sounds exciting.It can be,said
Bedwyr.Hunter considered the offer quickly. On the face of it, scouting
could be more dangerous to Steve than riding in the body of the army,
since the patrols would make the first contact with the enemy. They
could even be ambushed. However, Hunter also had to prepare for them
both to leave the area before any fighting began, ideally without
witnesses. Slipping away from the rest of the patrol momentarily would
be much easier than leaving the main column. He knew that scouts
occasionally were killed and never accounted for on campaigns of this
sort, so no one would question their disappearance. In fact, when he and
Steve had to return for Jane, they might claim simply to have lost their
way or to have been caught behind the enemy lines for a short time.We
accept,said Hunter.Ah! Im glad. Well do well together. Get your gear and
your horses.Cynric sighed loudly. All right.He jerked a thumb toward
Hunter. His weight is rough on a horse, but hes good with both his horse
and his weapons.He glanced at Steve and Hunter. Watch yourselves out
front, there.Then he trudged after the men going to gather
firewood.Steve looked toward the rear, where the baggage train had
rolled into view down the muddy road. Bedwyr, would you help us with a
personal matter? After we move our horses and belongings up to join your
patrol?What is it?We, uh, have to confront a man in the baggage train.
We dont want him to get away, and the wagonmaster stopped us from seeing
him before we left.The same man you were looking for in the palace, when
we met?Maybe. He...owes us a little money.Steve grinned. We want it
back.Bedwyr laughed. You told me before he did not owe you any
money.Steve had forgotten what he had told Bedwyr before, and now had to
explain the discrepancy. Well, you and I had just met. I, uh...You
wanted to be careful until you learned what kind of friend I might
be.Bedwyr chuckled. Of course I understand. And on this matter of
finding your friend, I will be glad to help you. But what do you want me
for?Maybe you will know some of the men. We wont be total strangers.Yes,
that would be good. I will go with you. And I know Gaius, the
wagonmaster. But first they will have to catch up and break formation to
make camp.I promise we will commit no violence,said Hunter. We only wish
to speak to him, preferably alone. We need just a moment.By the time
Hunter and Steve led their mounts to the place where Bedwyrs patrol had
stopped, the baggage train had halted behind the main column. Bedwyr
introduced Hunter and Steve to their new companions in the patrol. Then
they walked back through the camp to the baggage train..The men in the
wagon crews jumped off to unload. Hunter spotted MC 6 just as he hopped
from the wagon; when he reached the ground, he was hidden by other
wagons. Teamsters began unhitching the teams.I saw him for a
moment.Hunter pointed in the direction of MC 6.Good,said Steve.Bedwyr
moved up to lead the way.Hey, you there! Halt.Gaius blocked Bedwyrs
path. What do you want here, Bedwyr? Shouldnt you be out looking for
Saxons?Easy, Gaius.Bedwyr smiled pleasantly. My friends and I have
business with one of your men. It wont take long.He started to Walk
around the other man.Gaius stepped sideways to block his way. I remember
them from this morning. Get back to your places, all of you. We have
work to do.We have no wish to disturb anyone,said Hunter. Our business
will take only a moment.Not while were making camp, it wont.Gaius
glanced west, up at the sun. We barely have the daylight we need now. Go
on!Some other men had come up behind Gaius.Easy, friend,said Bedwyr,
still smiling. No one will interfere with your work. We only want a
quick word with one man.Get out!Gaius shouted, pointing back the way
they had come.Hunter considered forcing his way past the wagonmaster and
taking MC 6 by brute strength. Bedwyr might not join him, but Steve
would. However, even if they were successful, that move would force
Hunter to flee back with Steve and MC 6 to their own time in front of
many witnesses, risking a significant change in the tales they would
tell. Obviously, Steve and the men of this time might be unnecessarily
injured in the altercation. In addition, Hunter had to consider that the
sheer number of men in front of him might prevent him from pushing his
way through, since he would not display more than human strength to
them. He might simply create bad feeling without apprehending MC 6.
Hunter decided to postpone their approach to MC 6 again.Never mind,
Bedwyr,Hunter said quietly. He turned, followed by Steve and Bedwyr.Hes
really a good man,said Bedwyr, as they walked. Too many of the warriors
treat his men arrogantly, as though being a fighter is more important.
Gaius knows this isnt true and is very protective of them.I have to
admit, I kind of like him,said Steve. Hes direct and
businesslike.Perhaps we can approach our friend again later,said Hunter.
When the wagon crews have finished their work. Bedwyr, what do you
think?Not tonight. Gaius doesnt like being pushed. Maybe I can think of
a favor to do for him.What kind of favor?Steve asked.Well, if we chanced
across a nice deer, for instance, on our patrol tomorrow, or a few good
game birds, we might share our luck with him. In turn, he would share it
with his men, and owe us a favor in return.I understand,saidHunter.For
now, lets get back up to the patrol,said Bedwyr. Im ready for
dinner.Jane stood next to the mule in a small clump of trees. Wayne, on
the ground next to her, held its reins. with Ishihara, they watched the
wagons of the baggage train from a distance. They could see Hunters head
and shoulders over a crowd of men in front of the wagons;I cant hear
them,said Wayne. What are they saying to each other?Hunter and Steve
claim they want to get some money from a man working in the baggage
train,said Ishihara. I surmise that this is MC 6. They have a local man
named Bedwyr helping them.Jane kept looking, but she could still only
see Hunters head and shoulders from this distance. Steve remained lost
in the crowd. Like Wayne, she could not make out the conversation,
though she heard a low rumble of voices.You mean theyre about to get him
already?Waynes shoulders sagged.No. The wagonmaster, Gaius, has refused
to let them pass. He does not want anyone interfering with his wagon
crews while they are making camp.Hunters turning around,said Wayne. Is
he just giving up?For the moment, he has agreed to leave. However, this
provides us with information. I have not spotted MC 6 yet, but now we
know where to look for him.Lets go,said Wayne. Quick, before Hunter
sneaks back somehow. He wont give up for long. Maybe we can just run in
and get MC 6 right away.I do not recommend it,said Ishihara. In fact, I
strongly suggest that we do nothing at the moment.Why?Wayne demanded. We
know where he is, and hes not very far away.Gaius was adamant about not
allowing anyone to disturb his crews. Some of his men stood behind him,
and from their posture I believe they were ready to fight if necessary.
They are likely to remain angry.Oh.Wayne sighed, still looking at the
men around the wagons. I see what you mean. I hate waiting, but if we
cant get to him anyway, then we should lie low. We dont want to alert
Hunter or MC 6 to our presence.In the meantime, we should find a
comfortable place under the trees to spend the night.Ishihara turned and
looked down the road the way they had come. The camp followers have not
caught up yet, but they will. When they are nearby, we must avoid direct
contact with them, but their campfires will camouflage our own. Hunter
and Steve will have no reason to think we are here.Jane said nothing.
However, the renewed possibility of escaping Wayne and Ishihara gave her
a surge of excitement. Later tonight, she would try to get away. For
now, lying low suited her just fine.15Harriet spent the evening at
Gwenhyvaers side. After dinner, they joined the other women by a large
fireplace in the main hall drinking mead. The palace seemed empty
without the men who had gone with Artorius. Only the boys and the
elderly men remained. In the tor around them, a skeletal garrison still
guarded the walls, but their real protector had ridden out to meet the
enemy in his own land.The other women talked about the Saxons and how
long the men would be gone. Harriet noticed that none talked about which
ones would not come home. As the fire burned down, the discussion grew
quieter, however. Then, one by one, the other women retired for the
night to be alone with their thoughts.Are you sleepy?Harriet asked, when
she and Gwenhyvaer were left alone in front of the fire.A
little.Gwenhyvaer shrugged. But Im wide awake, too.She gazed into the
dwindling flames.Shall I put more wood on the fire?No.Harriet waited in
silence, watching her.If Artorius doesnt come back, I will be
nobody,said Gwenhyvaer quietly.Harriet wanted to reassure her, to tell
her that Artorius would return, but did not dare. A single comforting
word might pass as normal, but if Harriet remained in this time for the
rest of her life, she would have to learn to keep quiet. The alternative
could be gaining, over time, a reputation for knowing the future.In a
superstitious society, knowing the future could make her either a
respected wise woman or an evil sorceress, but she would have no control
over which one. She would five most comfortably by blending into
society, not by standing out. Besides, despite her disbelief in chaos
theory, she knew that she really could change the future if she
eventually altered the behavior of enough important people.If Artorius
falls, we are all in trouble,Harriet said carefully. But he knows his
enemy.Yes, thats true.Gwenhyvaer brightened a little. Hes been fighting
the Saxons for a long time.Harriet thought again of how young Gwenhyvaer
seemed. She reminded herself once more that Gwenhyvaer was a grown woman
in this society and almost past her prime marriage years. For that
reason, Gwenhyvaer had good reason to be concerned about her future with
Artorius.A womans position in this society depended largely on the
prestige of her father and her husband. Even worse, the status of men in
this time was fluid and uncertain, leaving any particular woman with few
good choices. The wealth and social strata of Roman society were gone
and the social system of medieval England lay many centuries in the
future. Gwenhyvaer knew that if she did not marry well before long, she
might have to choose between spending her life as a glorified servant in
the palace or marrying a man who rode with Artorius in summer and tended
sheep the rest of the year.Did your husband ever fight in a war
before?Gwenhyvaer asked. Did you worry about him all the time?He never
fought in a war,said Harriet.Really? Hes so big. He would make a good
warrior. Why didnt he?.Harriet suppressed a smile, thinking of the First
Law. She also realized she would have to embellish the story of her life
with Hunter a little in order to answer. When the Saxons drove us out of
Linnuis, on the coast, we had no army left in the area to join. And if
he had gone to find Artorius farther inland, I would have been
abandoned.I see,said Gwenhyvaer. Thats when he took you with him to
Gaul.Thats right.I hope I get married soon.Gwenhyvaer turned from the
fire to Harriet. Did you get married young?Well...yes.How old are you?Im
forty.Gwenhyvaer straightened in surprise, her eyes wide. What? Are you
joking with me?No. Im not joking.Harriet smiled at her surprise, knowing
that the average life expectancy here was in the early forties, due to
the stresses of physical labor, limited diet, and the lack of medical
knowledge and dental care. Im forty years old.But...you have all your
teeth.Gwenhyvaer looked at her mouth again, making sure.Harriet laughed
lightly. Yes, I do.She shrugged. Ive been fortunate.But you just dont
look that old. I thought you were...oh, I dont know.Gwenhyvaer stared at
her face.Harriet knew that a few individuals lived into their sixties
and seventies even in this century, but Gwenhyvaer had good reason to be
shocked. Most of the women Harriets age in this time did look much
older. The women she resembled most were closer to thirty.Can you...I
mean, when I get older, can you help me look that way?I dont have any
secrets. If I did, I would be glad to share them. But I dont.Gwenhyvaer
nodded slowly and turned to gaze into the fire again.Long after dark,
Jane lay under the stars wrapped up in her blanket. She knew from Waynes
slow, rhythmic breathing that he had fallen asleep. Of course, Ishihara
remained alert. She hoped that because she had made no move to escape,
he had not focused his attention on her.She knew that if she prepared
herself to make a move, perhaps by taking several deep breaths and
shifting her position, Ishihara would hear the difference. That would
cost her any element of surprise. Her best chance was to move
impulsively, so she did.All at once, she flung off the blankets,
scrambled up, and ran in the faint moonlight toward the camp.Hunter!She
screamed as loud as she could. Its Jane! Hunter! Here!Footsteps,
certainly Ishiharas, sounded behind her, gaining fast.Hunter!Hey! Get
her!Wayne yelled sleepily.Before she could shout again, she stumbled on
the uneven sod, losing speed. Ishiharas footsteps come right up behind
her and she felt a firm hand grasp her arm.Ahead of her in the camp,
startled voices spoke in puzzled tones, probably sentries.In another
moment, Ishihara slipped one arm around her waist and lifted her off the
ground. He moved his other hand from her arm to cover her mouth with his
hand. Jane squirmed, trying to shout for Hunter again.I know I am not
harming you,Ishihara said quietly. I can feel on my hand that you are
breathing sufficiently through your nose.Jane decided to save her
strength and quit fighting. Hunter should have heard her. Now she could
only wait.Hunter was lying on the ground pretending to sleep when he
heard Janes first shout. He recognized her voice even before she
identified herself. Instantly he rose and ran through the camp toward
the sound, leaving Steve asleep; he did not want to endanger Steve by
having him follow. By altering his vision to maximum light receptivity,
he saw clearly enough in the moonlight to avoid stumbling over sleeping
men or gear.You there! Stop!A man standing on the edge of the camp to
Hunters left shouted, holding up a spear. Stop, I say! Now!Hunter angled
his run away from the man, hoping to elude him. However, the man who had
shouted began running toward him, as did other sentries on Hunters
right. He changed his angle again, still running toward Janes voice.
Having the sentries follow him might actually help him rescue her.Halt!
Whats wrong with you? Stop!Up ahead, Hunter heard hoofbeats canter away.
Even at his best robotic running speed, he doubted he could catch the
mount. Still, he would normally have tracked the animal through the
darkness on the assumption that it carried Jane and probably
Wayne.However, he could not reveal his true running ability to the
sentries chasing him. For now, he would have to give up the chase. He
came to a halt and turned to face them.The first sentry ran up to him
holding his spear forward. When I order you to halt, you halt! What is
your business out here?Five other sentries jogged up behind him, three
from one side and two from another. They surrounded Hunter. No one else
spoke.You must have heard the woman shouting,Hunter said calmly. I came
to help.You know her?Hunter decided that admitting he knew Jane could
endanger her. He did not want the sentries to pay any independent
attention to her if they came across her later. No. I just came to
help.Shes just some camp follower quarreling with a scavenger,said the
sentry. Thats their own business, not ours. Stay out of it.Hes been a
troublemaker all day,growled another man. I remember him by his height.
He almost started a brawl by the wagons this afternoon.Is he the one? I
heard about that,said the first sentry. He lowered his spear point
toward Hunters abdomen, but did not advance. The Saxons will give you
all the fight you want. We have no rule against chasing a camp follower
in the middle of the night, but youll need your rest. Go on back to your
squad and Ill forget about it.Hunter knew that Ishihara still had to be
protecting Jane; in fact, he had probably forced her to stop yelling for
help. That took away the immediate First Law imperative for Hunter. He
nodded to the sentry and began walking through the moonlight back into
the camp with the sentries.The incident had not been a waste. Now he
knew that Jane, with Ishihara and presumably Wayne, was with the army.
He would have other chances to reach her.Ishihara jogged through the
moonlight away from the camp, carrying Jane by the waist under one arm.
He still held one hand over her mouth to stop her from shouting again.
Next to him, Wayne rode the mule at a canter.By the time Ishihara had
run back to their campsite carrying Jane, Wayne had already slipped the
bridle on the mule and rolled up the blankets he and Jane used. As soon
as he had seen Ishihara coming back with Jane, he had mounted up and
kicked the mule into a canter, letting Ishihara take the lead.Now
Ishihara, with his hearing turned up to maximum, could hear Hunter
giving explanations to the sentries behind them. Because their voices
were stationary, Ishihara knew the pursuit had ended for now. Still, he
continued to jog parallel to the river, staying just far enough from the
trees for Wayne to ride safely without hitting branches in the
darkness.When Ishihara heard one of the sentries discount Janes call for
help as a dispute among camp followers, he knew the sentries were not
concerned. After a while, he stopped, signaling for Wayne to rein in. At
this distance, he would hear Hunters footsteps approaching alone if
Hunter made another attempt to come close tonight.Ishihara set Jane on
her feet and released her. Are you well?Not as well as I could be,she
said angrily. Im real tired of all this. The idea that you arent harming
me is insane.I disagree,said Ishihara.We have to gag her,said Wayne. Or
else shell yell again and give away our position.The First Law will not
allow that,Jane declared firmly. It will hurt me and interfere with my
breathing. If you dont tie my hands, Ill pull it off. And if you tie me,
I might suffocate.Shes playing games with you,said Wayne. A careful gag
wont kill her.I agree with her,said Ishihara. I cannot allow her to be
gagged and tied. We will have to stay far enough from the column so that
I can clearly hear anyone or two sets of footsteps or hoofbeats
approaching us long before they come close. If necessary, we will
maintain enough distance so that even Hunter cannot hear her shout
again.Well be too far to get MC 6, in that case,said Wayne. So whats the
point of following him at all? Are you telling me just to give up?We are
far enough for both of you to get some rest,said Ishihara. During the
night, I will remain alert for further pursuit and I will consider our
options.Steve felt himself shaken awake early in the morning. When he
looked up, Bedwyr grinned and handed him a chunk of cold, cooked mutton
and a piece of bread. The earliest light of dawn broke as a yellow haze
through the gray clouds, angling among the trees along the river.It has
to last you all day,said Bedwyr. Eat it at your leisure, but we wont
have any more till we return to the new camp tonight.He also gave Steve
a small water skin on a leather strap.While the rest of the camp rose
slowly and built up their campfires, Bedwyr roused his scouting patrol
to eat their cold breakfast while saddling and bridling their horses and
mounting. Only a few minutes after waking, Steve found himself riding
out with Hunter, following the other ten men in the patrol.When everyone
else was out of hearing, Hunter quietly told Steve that he had heard
Jane call him for help the night before. Hunter related how the sentries
had stopped him. However, they now knew that Wayne, Jane, and Ishihara
had followed the column somehow.A light drizzle fell as the patrol moved
away from the camp. First they rode along the near side of the river,
walking their horses through the trees, going upstream. Then Bedwyr
turned and led them across the river. As they rode through the ford, the
horses walked into water up to the level of their underbellies. The
river was narrow here, though, and in a moment all the riders had
crossed.When they had left the trees on the far side of the river, Steve
saw Bedwyr rein in and glance over his shoulder to make sure all his
riders had crossed safely. Then the scouts looked in all directions,
across more grassy, rolling hills. In the distance to the east, Steve
could see the edge of a forest. To his right, far downstream, he saw
another patrol also cross the river and leave the trees. That patrol
angled away from them, to the southeast.Bedwyr suddenly kicked his mount
into a canter and rode off toward the distant forest. The rest of the
patrol followed. Steve continued to ride in the rear, next to Hunter,
squinting in the drizzle.16After about half a kilometer, Bedwyr slowed
to a walk again. He waved for the patrol to keep moving in the same
direction, but stopped and waited for Steve and Hunter to come up. Then,
with a big grin, he fell into step next to them.I love this open
country,said Bedwyr. We can spot and ride down any Saxon who hikes out
of the forest. As soon as we came across the river, we could see at a
glance that this areas clear-not that I thought theyve had time to
advance this far.The forest up ahead could be dangerous to us,
then?Hunter asked.Well be careful, all right, when we get there. Even a
foul Saxon can hide among the trees or climb up into the branches. I
still say were too far from their territory to meet them yet, but we
wont take chances when we reach any forest.Bedwyr shrugged. Last year,
we didnt see any Saxons for several more days after we passed through
here.You rode this route last summer?Steve asked. Were on the same
campaign allover again?Oh, yes.Bedwyr frowned, eyeing the cloudy sky
above them. More Saxons sail across the Channel every year. We dont have
similar numbers coming to join us. Every year, we hope to kill enough to
drive them back toward the sea again, but the work feels much the same,
year after year,Steve nodded.Last year, we found the Saxons waiting for
us on the opposite bank of the River Dubglas. Artorius didnt want to
attack against their strength across the water, where our horses would
lose the force of their charge in walking or swimming. The Saxons were
relying on that, of course; they carry eight foot lances to unhorse us,
and in the water they have a better chance. So we moved up and down the
bank to get around them, but the Saxons kept stretching their line to
block us.What did you do?Hunter asked.When we had stretched their line
thin enough, we took advantage of our mobility. Artorius led one end of
our line on a fast ride doubling back to the center and charged across
the river anyway. They didnt have time to mass their men again to meet
us, since theyre all on foot.And the charge worked?Steve asked.Yes. Even
through the water. Their line was so thin that they broke easily. After
that, the rest of the Saxon line panicked.Bedwyr grinned. It was easy
slaughter after that, I promise you.What did you do during the rest of
the summer?Hunter asked. That battle itself must not have taken long.
Did you fight more than one?We fought only one pitched battle against
their full numbers,said Bedwyr. It occurred late in the season. You see,
we spent the early part of the summer jockeying for position.Even with
your advantage in mobility?Hunter asked. Artorius could ride in circles
around any Saxon army and attack at any time.The Saxons come on like
waves of the sea,said Bedwyr. Yes, we can ride around them, but we must
be careful about entering battle. Their numbers are so much greater that
Artorius dares not fight them recklessly.So what did you do?Steve asked.
Just wait until the right time?We did plenty of waiting, all right, but
we didnt just ride around and look at the landscape, either. Our
strategy was to attack the Saxons in small groups.What do you
mean?Hunter asked. How can you separate waves of the sea?Bedwyr laughed.
They keep coming, but they dont live together in cities the way Romans
do. They live in small villages.But once you attacked one, didnt they
rally their army together?Steve asked.That was their goal,said Bedwyr.
But we stayed in the saddle and rode hard to confuse them.What do you
mean?Steve grinned wryly. I hope you dont mind all these questions, but
its new to us.Of course,said Bedwyr. Thats why Artorius wants the green
riders mixing with veterans.You said you confused them?Oh, yes,said
Bedwyr. Well, sometimes we drew out Saxon bands from their homes and
then rode around them to raid and bum down their villages. We attacked
small bands before they could join each other, to fight them without
their advantage of numbers. Our patrols let themselves be seen in
different places to give the impression that our main column could be
coming from any direction.I understand,said Hunter.We spent all summer
maneuvering to avoid fighting a massed Saxon horde, but they finally
formed and marched on us. I believe they grouped early this year because
of it. Now well have to meet them in pitched battle without whittling
down their numbers slowly first.This campaign could be decided early in
the season, then,said Hunter.Its possible,said Bedwyr. But first well
just have to make sure this route is clear for the main column.He
steered his mount out to one side and, with a shout, moved into a canter
again.The rest of the patrol, caught off-guard, hurried after him on
their way to the forest ahead.Bedwyr drew up about twenty meters from
the edge of the forest, studying the trees and sky just above it. The
rest of the patrol gathered around him. Then the veterans fanned out and
rode slowly among the trunks. Steve and Hunter followed Bedwyr.No birds
have been disturbed,Steve quietly.I hear no signs of humans in these
trees,Hunter whispered, leaning close to Steve. Of course, I cannot
reveal that to them, but you may know you are in no danger from Saxons
right here.Steve grinned.Bedwyr led the patrol cautiously through the
forest. When the patrol became convinced that no Saxons were there to
ambush them, they looked carefully for tracks or firepits that would
indicate a recent presence. No one found any sign of them, either, but
the patrol did not relax.As the day advanced, the riders ate from their
pieces of mutton and bread. The patrol could not trot or canter through
the dense forest, so their progress slowed for the rest of the morning.
Shortly after midday, Bedwyr turned his mount to face Steve and
Hunter.Can you find your way back to the main column?Bedwyr asked.I
suppose,Steve said in surprise. You want us to go back?Have we made a
mistake of some sort?Hunter asked. We must know.No, nothing like
that.Bedwyr laughed. You arent being punished. But its time to send word
back to Artorius that the way is clear this far. Other advance patrols
will report, too, and he will decide exactly which way to go. But the
column cannot come much farther than this before it will be time to make
camp again.It seems early to go back,said Steve, glancing up at the sun.
Only half the day is gone.By the time you reach him, and the column
advances to this spot, the sun will be low enough,said Bedwyr. I want to
see how you two fare on an errand alone.We will do it, of course,said
Hunter. We will find the main column.Good! Well patrol a short distance
from here for most of the afternoon. If Artorius decides to lead the
column another way, then well find the rest of you later.Bedwyr reined
his horse around and led his other men forward.This task will be simple
enough,Hunter said quietly, turning his own mount. We will follow our
own tracks back. At some point, I should be able to hear the hoofbeats
in the distance.Steve grinned. This is a job I could probably do without
you, Hunter. But Im glad I dont have to.Jane dozed fitfully during the
remainder of the night and woke up tired. She had hoped that Hunter
would swoop in during the night and rescue her like one of the knights
out of the Arthurian legend that would grow out of all this in years to
come. Since he had not, she felt discouraged and wondered why he had not
responded to her shouting.Wayne and Jane ate a cold breakfast of bread
and mutton, the same as dinner the evening before. Very little remained.
Ishihara built a small fire and boiled water from the river in it before
allowing them to drink it. Afterward, Wayne and Jane mounted the mule
and Ishihara jogged with them.Though Wayne and Ishihara had not
discussed any detailed plans in her hearing, Jane understood that they
had certain limitations. They would either have to make an aggressive
move to reach MC 6 this evening, or else they would have to get more
food. Ishihara would not allow either human to go hungry and she doubted
he would risk trying to get food from the column itself. Because they
did not have the equipment necessary to hunt or fish, they would either
have to turn back or else abandon Emryss mule and jump through time and
space with or without MC 6. Jane hoped she could get Hunters attention
before Ishihara took one of those choices.The day passed uneventfully.
As before, the riders outpaced the baggage train. Ishihara kept the end
of the baggage train within his own sight or hearing, but avoided
drawing too close. He also stayed clear of the camp followers.Once the
riders had left the baggage train behind, Wayne turned to
Ishihara.Hunter must have ridden on ahead by now. If MC 6 is in the
baggage train, then Hunter cant get him. We might be able to get MC 6 on
the march.I do not like our chances,said Ishihara, still jogging next to
the mule. I dare not take Jane too close to the camp followers or near
the men in the baggage train. Also, I cannot allow you to approach them
alone. The wagon crews will consider all of us simply camp followers and
may be hostile. They will probably consider us potential thieves.Then
you think of something,Wayne growled angrily. This project has to work
somehow. And we havent had many chances to get MC 6 while Hunter is too
far away to interfere. Cant we take advantage of this somehow?The only
arrangement I can accept is one that keeps you and Jane away from the
camp. If I approach MC 6 without you, I will have the force of the
Second Law to order him to come with me as long as he believes I am
human. I can tell him to follow me unless he detects that I am a
robot.If he turns up his hearing and actually listens, hell hear that
you dont have a human heartbeat,said Wayne. If he studies your skin
under magnification, he might see your microscopic solar cells. But all
that depends on whether or not he bothers. Since he isnt expecting a
robot to approach him in this time period, he may not have his
sensitivity turned up to the point where hell notice.In any case, I
suggest we wait until after the baggage train stops to make camp before
we execute our attempt.Wayne sighed. Yeah, all right.Jane decided not to
say anything. She wanted to think of as many objections as she could to
pressure Ishihara with the Laws of Robotics. Instead of talking
spontaneously, she would think up some arguments now and present them
when Ishihara was about to go after MC 6.Late in the afternoon, Jane
could see men riding toward the column from different directions,
sometimes along small paths or intersecting roads and sometimes
overland. Some rode singly or in small groups; others arrived in large
troops, lined up in a military column themselves. The new arrivals moved
onto the road ahead of the baggage train.The baggage train finally
reached the spot where the rest of the column had stopped to make camp,
in a forest just past a wide stretch of open country. Other troops whom
Jane had not seen had also arrived at this rendezvous point, making the
camp much larger than it had been the night before. Ishihara led Wayne
into the forest and stopped where they could see the baggage train
through the trees.Have you seen Hunter?Wayne asked quietly.Not yet. The
visibility is poor, of course, here in the forest.Ishihara helped Jane
down.Wayne dismounted. Thats good. Hunter will have trouble seeing us,
too.That is true,said Ishihara. We must decide exactly what our move
will be.Jane knew that the men in the baggage train could hear her
clearly enough if she shouted for help again. However, she had no way of
knowing where Hunter was, or if he could hear her. He might be so far up
the column that her voice would be drowned out by the sounds of men
setting up the camp, yelling orders, and by the hoofbeats of hundreds of
horses hobbled for the night. Hunters failure to respond last night
worried her. She decided not to anger Wayne any further by another shout
unless she really had reason to think Hunter could help.17All right,
Ishihara,Wayne said firmly. The chance weve waited for is coming up. No
more delays. We have to find a way to get MC 6 now.Then what will we do
with him?Ishihara asked. We must plan our approach based on our
escape.Well jump a safe distance away-maybe back to the hills near
Emryss hut, early tomorrow morning. I can open up MC 6 and finally start
my investigation into what went wrong. As weve discussed during past
missions, I cant go back to Mojave Center until I have information that
will work to my advantage with the Oversight Committee.I understand. We
will simply have to apologize to Emrys for losing the mule.Yeah. But
when we talked about what to do before, you said you could approach MC 6
alone. Go ahead and see if you can find him. Well wait right here.Dont
leave us,Jane said quickly.Shut up,said Wayne. Shes just trying to
interfere with your thinking, Ishihara.The camp followers are coming up
behind the baggage train again,said Jane. If you cant take us to the
baggage train, you cant risk leaving us here. If those scavengers come
toward us, Wayne cant protect us.Nonsense,said Wayne. Why would they
bother us? We dont have anything of value. Go on, Ishihara.We have the
mule,said Jane. They could ride it or eat it.She has a point,said
Ishihara. In addition, she may escape from you.Not if youll tie her. You
refused before. How about just tying her to a tree trunk for a few
minutes?I cannot. The First Law-All right, all right. I know what it
says.Wayne paced angrily among the trees. Then all three of us can go
look for him. You can protect us.Among all those men? Even a robot could
be overwhelmed,said Jane.That is true,said Ishihara.Then you stay here
with her,said Wayne impatiently. I can go find MC 6 on my own, without
the mule. Nobody will have any reason to bother me.I cannot allow that
under the First Law, either,said Ishihara.Why not?Wayne demanded.When
Hunter approached the baggage train twenty-four hours ago, he was
stopped by a group of men willing to commit violence. I cannot allow you
to risk that.Thats true,said Jane. Thats another risk.Shut up, Wayne
repeated. Ishihara, I instruct you to suggest a plan that you can
accept. At this point, even a fairly low chance of success is better
than total inaction. Think of something!Maybe there is no safe way to do
this,said Jane. Too much risk is involved, Ishihara. How about a new
approach? Talk to Hunter about working together.Dont listen to her,
Ishihara,said Wayne. I gave you an instruction.I have a plan,said
Ishihara.Yeah? What is it?Wayne folded his arms. This better be good.You
take Jane in a slow but deliberate ride on the mule away from the camp
and the road. If any riders approach you, ride slowly away from them,
but do not appear to flee or they may pursue you to find out why, You
can outdistance any camp followers who approach you on foot, so they
probably will not try. At the slightest sign of danger to you, shout for
me and ride back in my direction. I should be able to reach you quickly.
If no trouble develops, then keep riding away from the camp. I will
catch up to you, with or without MC 6.Exactly what are you going to do?I
will attempt to solicit MC 6s aid through a ruse. However, my use of the
Second Law depends entirely on his belief that I am human. As we
discussed, if he detects that I am a robot, he will not only refuse to
obey, but he will flee, alerted to our pursuit.You cant leave us like
that,Jane insisted. Well still be in potential danger.This will be
acceptable,said Ishihara. In the event of immediate danger, I will use
the belt unit to take us away from here.You wont have time to set
it,said Jane. If were riding away from someone and youre running to meet
us, we wont have much time.I will set it now.Ishihara reached inside his
tunic, opened his abdomen, and brought out the unit. He looked around in
the distance, then changed the settings. In the event we have to use it,
we will jump only a few hours into the future, after dark, to a spot
half a kilometer away. That will be close enough for us to consider
future moves.Jane could not think of any more arguments. Ishihara, after
all, made the final interpretation of what he could accept under the
First Law. She sighed and looked at Wayne.Mount up,said Wayne.Ishihara
waited until Wayne and Jane had ridden twenty meters away from the camp,
out of the trees into open country. Because Ishihara could see they were
alone there, he felt he could leave them for a short time. He walked
through the trees toward the baggage train.Moving slowly, Ishihara
studied the wagons as he approached them. Because Artorius had stopped
to make camp in a forested area, the wagons remained lined up on the
road or just off of it, where space permitted. Last night, the wagons
had bunched together at the rear of the camp, and the wagon crews had
mixed together freely. Now the crews were strung out along the road as
they unloaded their wagons.Ishihara saw that he could approach most of
the wagons without attracting the attention of the wagonmaster. In fact,
because of the trees, visibility was limited for everyone. That, too,
would work to Ishiharas advantage.He considered his story as he searched
for MC 6. Finally, he saw MC 6 standing on the ground near a wagon,
unharnessing a team of horses. Ishihara walked up to him.I need
help,Ishihara said to MC 6 in Briton. Can you help me?MC 6 turned and
looked at him. He shrugged, gesturing that he could not understand. Then
he turned back to the horses he was tending.Ishihara looked at another
man, standing in the wagon moving small kegs around. I need help. Can
you spare this man for a moment?Eh? Who are you?I drove a wagon behind
one of the veteran troops. We just arrived in camp.You know this
man?No.Well, we teamsters should stick together. Hey, you.The man waved
his arms to get MC 6s attention. Hes a real cooperative little fellow,
but no one can figure out what language he understands.MC 6 glanced up
at the man in the wagon.Go with him. Help him.The man in the wagon
pointed from MC 6 to Ishihara.MC 6 nodded.Thank you.Ishihara nodded to
MC 6 and walked away from the wagon. MC 6 walked with him.Ishihara could
only hope that MC 6 would not think to magnify his hearing or sight and
examine Ishihara closely.Hunter had located Artorius at the head of his
column with no trouble. Artorius had responded to Hunters scouting
report by choosing to follow Bedwyrs route for the day. Hunter and Steve
rode with him at the head of the column to point out the way.Late in the
day, Bedwyr spotted them and led his patrol back to meet the column. He
recommended a place to camp and Hunter and Steve rejoined the scouting
patrol. The day had remained uneventful for the scouts, as well as for
the main column.As the other riders dismounted and tended their horses,
Steve spoke quietly to Hunter from the saddle.Before we dismount, cant
we do something about our mission? I enjoyed todays ride, but we dont
want to keep this up all summer.I agree. However, we have earned some
greater respect today, and we are considered more a part of the troop
now. Perhaps we can approach the baggage train again and complete our
task.You told me this morning you heard Jane last night. Can we look for
her somehow?I doubt that she remains nearby. Wayne and Ishihara almost
certainly have kept their distance since she revealed her presence.
First I suggest we attempt to reach MC 6 again. Then we will look for a
sign of Janes presence.All right. Got any ideas about how to avoid that
Gaius again?Yes. In this forest, I expect the wagons will have to stop
in a line alone the road. We should ride parallel to the road on
horseback, keeping our distance from the baggage train. I will look and
listen for Gaius and for MC 6, as well.Sounds good to me. Lead the
way.Hunter reined his mount around the road away from the camp, through
the trees, ducking under branches. He heard the hoofbeats of Steves
mount following him. Hunter selected a route that would carry them down
the line of the column, close enough for him to hear and see the men at
the wagons through the trees but far enough to avoid immediate notice by
the wagonmaster.Jane sat behind Wayne on the mule, riding at a walk away
from the camp and the road. At first, they did not bother to turn around
as they wove through the trees. They did not run across anyone else, nor
did anyone behind them show any interest in where they were going.After
a while, Wayne turned the mule so they could look behind them. By this
time, the trees hid the camp from view, though they could hear men
shouting orders and horses walking. Without a word, Wayne turned and
continued riding away.As they rode Jane looked back over her shoulder
several times, but saw no one. If Ishihara was bringing MC 6, the two
robots would have to catch up after Wayne decided to stop and wait. She
decided not to do anything until she learned whether or not Ishihara
succeeded.Wayne, following Ishiharas plan, kept the mule moving through
the forest. He glanced back over his shoulder every so often, but
neither of them spoke. In order to avoid riding directly into tree
branches, Wayne had to face forward most of the time.Jane realized that
she had an advantage in riding behind him; she could turn her head and
look back without Wayne knowing. The motion of Waynes shoulders when he
turned told her when he was looking behind them even if she had already
looked back. She turned her head and continued to look back, despite the
awkward angle, as they rode.As the mule plodded on, Jane finally saw a
motion through the trees behind them. Ishihara was jogging after them,
closely followed by MC 6. The forest was so dense here that they had
come close without being seen; on the damp earth, their footsteps had
not been loud enough for her to hear.If Ishihara had induced MC 6 to
come with him somehow, instead of grabbing him and bringing him by
force, Jane figured that MC 6 had his hearing turned on. That meant she
could call to him in English. Suddenly encouraged, she looked for a soft
spot on the ground among the trees.Suddenly Jane slipped off the mule,
pretending to lose her balance. She allowed herself to fall on the
ground, where she judged she could land safely. Startled, Wayne reined
in and looked back at her.Ishihara, help me!Jane shouted. Then, as
Ishihara ran toward her, she looked at the other robot. MC 6, run!
Theyre going to dismantle you!The small component robot instantly darted
to one side and ran through the trees. He took off at an angle away from
both them and the column to their rear. His actions were driven by the
Second Law to obey her instruction to run and by the Third Law to
protect himself.Hey!Wayne shouted, finally seeing MC 6 for the first
time. Stop! I order you! Stop, robot!He wheeled the mule around and rode
after MC 6, leaning low to avoid tree branches. Halt! I need you under
the First Law!MC 6 did not seem to believe that. Jane did not see him
come back. He might have turned off his hearing once he understood the
danger present to him.Jane had not been sure her ruse would work; MC 6
might have felt required by the First Law to come forward with Ishihara
to help her. However, he had apparently judged that Ishihara would take
care of her adequately. She had gambled on that. If she had told MC 6
that she was unharmed, Ishihara would also have been freed of the need
to help her and he might have captured MC 6.Instead, Ishihara now
hesitated where he stood. He was momentarily undecided between the
immediate need to care for Jane and the First Law issue requiring him to
capture MC 6 for Waynes long-term welfare. Every moment helped MC 6
escape.Help me up, Ishihara,said Jane, to stall him further. She
remained on the ground.Ishihara hurried toward her and knelt down. Are
you injured?Jane decided that telling extreme lies would be a mistake;
teaching him not to trust her could backfire if she was in real trouble.
Stalling, on the other hand, seemed safe enough. she said nothing.
Behind Ishihara, Wayne came riding back, scowling. MC 6 had escaped
him.Ishihara! Go get him!Wayne yelled.Are you injured?Ishihara
repeated.Not seriously. Please help me up.Of course.Ishihara, shes
faking!Wayne dismounted near them. Track that robot now, before he gets
back to the wagons! I couldnt ride fast enough in this stupid forest to
keep up, but he hasnt gone far.Jane remained passive as Ishihara put one
arm under her shoulders and raised her up. Then he shifted his position
and helped her stand. She took a deep breath and leaned on Ishiharas
shoulder.Ill take care of her!Wayne yelled. Ishihara, go get him!You
seem unharmed,Ishihara said to Jane.Yes, Ill be all right.Now!Wayne
grabbed Ishiharas arm and pushed after MC 6. Ill watch her!Ishihara
finally turned and jogged in the direction MC 6 had gone.Wayne watched
him go.18As soon as Wayne turned away, Jane ducked under a branch and
ran.Hey!Wayne yelled behind her. Oh, no, you dont! Come back here!Jane
darted around a sapling and bent down to avoid another low-hanging
branch, but she felt Wayne grab her hair from behind. He yanked, pulling
her head back. She threw her arms around the branch and hung on, but
could not move her head.Ishihara!Jane yelled. Then she let out a loud,
long, scream, much more exaggerated than the situation really
warranted.Shut up!Wayne put his other hand over her mouth and tried to
pull her away from the tree branch.Jane struggled, but she was not
really angry or scared. She was still deliberately provoking Wayne and
forcing Ishihara to protect her instead of catching MC 6. She bent her
knees, dropping to the ground as she thrashed in his grasp. Wayne had to
fall, too, in order to hang onto her.Neither of them spoke. Jane let go
of the branch, but tried to pull his hand away from her mouth. In a
moment, she heard footsteps running toward them. Then suddenly Wayne
released her. She let herself fall back onto the grass, looking
up.Ishihara had pulled Wayne away and now held him firmly as they both
stood over her.I told you to catch MC 6,Wayne growled, but he did not
sound as angry as before.You know I cannot allow this,said Ishihara. If
I release you, will you remain calm?Yeah, yeah, all right. But youve
been manipulated. Shes done it to both of us.Ishihara let go of him. You
didnt have to grab me,said Jane, remaining where she lay. You could have
let me go.That, too, was for Ishiharas benefitAre you harmed?Ishihara
asked.Not really. But I didnt like it much.She looked at Wayne. Keep
your hands to yourself from now on.Shes fine,Wayne wearily. And Im not
going to hurt her. You still might have a chance to get MC 6, if you
hurry. You can track him.No, you cant,said Jane. As soon as you leave
again, Im running away. And Wayne will try to stop me again and well
wind up wrestling around again. Ishihara, you either have to stay here
and protect me from Wayne or let me go.I wont hurt her,said Wayne. Ive
never wanted to hurt her. But we cant let her tell Hunter where we
are-or where MC 6 has gone, either.You cant trust him,said Jane. You
just saw him grab me and pull me down.If you promise not to run away, I
can trust him,said Ishihara.I refuse to promise,said Jane. In fact, I
promise to run away every chance I get from now on.Ishihara, cant you
see what shes doing?Wayne demanded. This whole argument is set up to
stop you from getting MC 6, and thats all it is.The First Law has no
exceptions,said Ishihara. I must make my own interpretation of
priorities. Unless you decide to let Jane go find Hunter on her own, I
must remain with both of you.Wayne sighed with resignation. I cant do
that. We might as well give up as do that.Then I suggest we move
somewhat farther from the camp and make our own camp for the night,said
Ishihara. The sun will go down soon.All right,said Wayne. But if youre
staying here instead of chasing MC 6, make sure that she stays, too.Jane
indulged in an impish grin, relieved that she had foiled the capture of
MC 6. Why, of course, Wayne. Anything you want.Steve rode up and down a
route roughly parallel to the road with Hunter. Neither of them spoke.
Steve could hear the men and horses of the baggage train and
occasionally saw them through the trees.Finally Hunter reined in and
turned to Steve.I have heard and seen no sign of MC 6. While I grant
that he may not be speaking, I should be able to hear his footsteps,
which are of a distinctively light weight among grown men. If he was
helping others, I should hear them talk about him as they work, if they
do not address him directly.You think he figured out that we came from
his time to get him?I must consider it possible. He may have studied my
skin with magnified vision while we spoke with Gaius last night. Also,
he may have been approached by Wayne and Ishihara, in which case they
could have revealed their purpose.I guess if youd heard any sign of
them, you would have told me.I have not. As we discussed before, I
expect that after Jane shouted for my help, Wayne and Ishihara took her
a safe distance away from the column.If they know MC 6 came with the
column, they must have followed. Lets go look for tracks.Hunter looked
through the trees at the position of the sun. I do not estimate we have
enough light to pursue any tracks for long.Wait a minute. Didnt you say
a while ago that if we couldnt find MC 6, we could look for Jane?We have
taken more time than I expected in searching for MC 6. I cannot allow
you to miss dinner. Nor can we wander too far from the camp before
darkness falls.I can miss a meal if I have to. Besides, we dont have to
be gone long. Lets look around.Agreed.Hunter rode back up the route they
had taken before, but now he examined the ground. Steve said nothing. He
felt trapped by their need to perform duties in the column.Here.Hunter
stopped and pointed to hoofprints, accompanied by smaller depressions in
the grass and soft earth.You found him?I have found the tracks of one
mount and the footsteps of Ishihara and another set of the right size to
be MC 6.Hunter looked through the trees away from the road. I surmise
that Wayne and Jane rode double on the animal.You mean they got him?I
see that they have him, but only since the baggage train halted. Wayne
has not had time to dismantle MC 6 yet.Lets go!No,said Hunter. I will
go. I suggest you return to the squad and tell Bedwyr that a personal
matter arose for me. Assure him that I will not need dinner and that I
will return in time to do my duties tomorrow.Hell expect you to come
back in time to get a nights sleep. I cant tell him you dont need
it.Listen carefully for my voice. If I call you from the camp, it will
mean we are ready to leave the column permanently. Otherwise, I will
simply return during the night to resume my position.I should go with
you. Maybe I can help.We must maintain our goodwill with Bedwyr.Yeah,
all right. Good luck. Get going.Steve kicked his mount and rode up the
line, hoping that Hunter would get MC 6 quickly.Hunter leaned low and
rode at a quick walk, dodging trees. The tracks in the soft earth were
clear and fresh. This was the best opportunity to get both MC 6 and Jane
that he had yet seen.When Hunter reached a spot where the grass and some
small bushes had been crushed, he studied the tracks and the marks
carefully. He saw that MC 6 had run away from this spot alone, without
reaching the area where the ground cover had been disturbed. He guessed
that Jane had somehow freed MC 6, though he could not tell how.Because
the hoofprints and Ishiharas tracks led in a different direction from
those of MC 6, Hunter had to decide which way to go.Jane had apparently
remained in Isiharas company, so Hunter judged that finding MC 6 was
more urgent. He decided to track MC 6 as long as the waning daylight
held out. As he did so, he observed that the component robot did not
make any effort to hide his tracks, probably relying on speed and
agility to avoid human pursuit.The forest darkened quickly, however, and
Hunter realized that he could not continue tracking MC 6 for long. Even
if he used the maximum light receptivity of his vision, too much of the
moonlight would be blocked by the canopy of leaves overhead for him to
see fine details. For now, his infrared vision could still perceive the
faint warm spots on the ground left by MC 6s feet, but the heat was
dissipating quickly. Hunter would not catch MC 6 before it vanished.He
saw no point in riding on. However, before he returned to the camp, he
reviewed MC 6s route in hope of finding a pattern. The component robot
seemed to be moving roughly parallel to the road, going ahead of the
main column in anticipation of its journey tomorrow.Hunter guessed that
MC 6 still hoped to prevent the violence of the coming battle, as
unlikely as that seemed. Since Wayne and Ishihara had located him in the
baggage train, Hunter felt certain that MC 6 would not return there.
Still, Hunter might be able to pick up his trail tomorrow.He turned and
rode back to the camp.As Steve ate bread and mutton again by the patrols
campfire, he noted that Bedwyr kept glancing into the gathering
darkness. Bedwyr had not objected to Hunter pursuing a personal errand,
but he seemed uncomfortable. When Hunter finally arrived, however,
Bedwyr simply offered him his dinner.During a walk to the latrine, Steve
asked Hunter what he had found. Hunter explained and Steve resigned
himself to another wait. During the evening, Steve hoped Jane would yell
for help again, but if she did, even Hunter did not hear her.As Steve
lay rolled in his blanket near the dwindling campfire, he felt trapped
again by their presence in the column. At this point, Hunter knew both
Jane and MC 6 to be nearby but not actually traveling in the column.
Tomorrow, Steve and Hunter would have to ride out with the patrol
instead of searching for either of them; in the meantime, Ishihara would
probably start tracking MC 6 in earnest.Steve wondered, as he drifted
off to sleep, if Hunter would consider deserting tomorrow. He would ask
when he got Hunter alone. Then, tired from the long day in the saddle,
he slept soundly.A hand on his shoulder shook him awake.Steve rolled
over, blinking groggily. The night was still black. He heard other men
in the squad stirring. By the faint glow of the embers nearby, he saw a
mans shadow standing over him.We must ride,Bedwyr said grimly. Move
fast.He walked away and bent over someone else.Steve forced himself up.
He could feel that he had only slept a few hours at most. His eyes
adjusted to the faint moonlight and he saw that Hunter had already
brought their horses up.Sleepily Steve rose and slid his sword into his
belt. He stumbled to his saddle where it lay on the ground. As he threw
it on his mount he spoke quietly, his voice rough with sleep.Have you
heard whats going on?Yes,said Hunter. More patrols rode out at sundown.
They knew they would have to ride slowly in the moonlight and they
expected to camp alone for the night at a forward position, then report
back in the morning. Instead, before stopping to make camp, one of them
stumbled across the campfires of the entire Saxon army. The riders just
got back a few minutes ago.Thats right,said Bedwyr, holding out more
bread and cold mutton for them. The Saxons have already crossed the
River Dubglas and marched out to meet us on our own territory this
year.Steve accepted his breakfast and slipped both pieces into his
tunic. He glanced up and down the dark camp. No one else is up yet?No
need to disturb them,said Bedwyr. On foot, the Saxons will need a full
days march or more to reach us. At dawn, Artorius will lead the column
forward with a good nights sleep. Over four thousand of our veterans met
us on this site yesterday. In daylight, the column will cover the
distance in less than four hours. By midday, he will draw close enough
to the Saxons to view the terrain and choose his tactics.What is our
assignment?Hunter asked.We will reach them by dawn or shortly after,
riding slowly in the moonlight,said Bedwyr. When we have seen which way
they march in the morning, we will report back to Artorius so he knows
where to find them.Hunter nodded.Steve swung up into his saddle. Hunter
gave him his spear and shield. Within minutes, the rest of the patrol
had also mounted. Bedwyr led them out of camp at a walk, riding single
file among the other squads and the trees.At first, Steve was excited by
the danger of their new task. However, they all knew that the real
danger lay several hours away at the earliest. Steves enthusiasm waned
quickly. Throughout the remaining hours of darkness, the patrol
continued at a walk, remaining in single file so that only Bedwyr, in
the lead, had to find a path.When enough light appeared in the east to
see into the distance, Bedwyr halted for a moment, looking around in all
directions. Steve did the same, but they were still in a forest; he saw
nothing but trees. Then, without a word, Bedwyr led them forward
again.Hunter rode with his aural sensitivity at maximum. At midmorning,
he heard ten pairs of human footsteps in the forest ahead before any of
the humans in the patrol reacted. However, a moment later, several small
birds fluttered out of the trees ahead. Bedwyr stopped immediately,
raising one hand, palm open, to halt the entire patrol.Hunter felt his
own tension rising under the First Law. On the surface, the First Law
required him to stop the violence entirely. He knew he could not, of
course, without altering history.However, Hunter would protect Steve. As
a last resort, Hunter would even return them to their own time, though
he hoped to avoid that. He reached inside his tunic to make sure that
its folds did not interfere with his access to the belt unit hidden
inside his abdomen and to set the time at which they would return if
necessary. Satisfied, he listened carefully to the movement of the
unseen men ahead.Bedwyr hefted his spear and rode forward slowly. Now
the other riders fanned out, moving to surround the area where the birds
had been disturbed. Hunter allowed the riders in front of him to open
some distance before he followed them. Steve remained behind him.19The
movement of horses sent another flight of birds out of the branches
overhead. Hunter heard shouts from the forest in front of them; in
response, Bedwyr leaned low and kicked his mount into a trot. The other
riders in the patrol did the same, whooping and yelling.Hunter heard
bowstrings plucked as he moved forward slowly. Steve came up alongside
him, looking around uneasily. The rest of the patrol soon rode out of
sight among the trees. Hunter turned to Steve.Remain behind me. We will
pretend that the trees have blocked our charge.He rode forward at a
trot, too, on Bedwyrs path.More shouts and the sound of metal clanging
reached Hunter before he could see the skirmish. He rode between two
large trees and saw two strange men lying dead on the ground under the
trees. Next to them, one of Bedwyrs men lay on his back with two arrows
in his torso.Hunter heard the sounds of men running away on foot and
hoofbeats following them. No one else was in sight yet. The patrol was
dispersing as the riderspursuit took them in different directions.You
okay?Steve asked. With people getting killed around you?Yes,said Hunter.
From all our missions, I have learned to focus on my larger task in
these situations. I feel great stress, however.You want to take
off?Steve asked. We could claim to get lost.Not yet, but soon. For now,
we should stay close to Bedwyr and find out what he will do next.Lead
on.In a few minutes, Hunter and Steve caught up to Bedwyr, who had
stopped at the edge of a clearing.Bedwyr glanced back and grinned at
them over his shoulder. Come up and see.Hunter drew up next to him and
looked down a long, open, grassy slope. At its base, over a kilometer
away, an army of men carrying long lances and shields, wearing short
swords, marched at an angle. Apparently they hoped to circle around the
slope rather than climb it. They did not march in formation, but in a
long, formless line, its far end hidden by another forest on the far
side of the downward slope.What are you smiling about?Steve asked.
Theyve massed their numbers, as you said. Theyll be harder to defeat
this way, wont they?Too late to worry about that,said Bedwyr. But we
found them before they found us. Thats our task. Now, then. Artorius
will have marched at dawn. I estimate that leaves him four hoursride
behind us. Can you find the column again, as you did yesterday?Yes, I
believe so,said Hunter.Good. I will send both of you; I want you both to
gain more experience. If you ride directly toward Artorius as he
continues to advance, you should meet him in only two hours. Even if you
have a little trouble locating him, you will not need much more
time.What is our message?Tell Artorius where we have found the Saxons
and which way they are marching. In another hour, I will send more
couriers back to report whether their line of march has changed or
remained the same. In the meantime, I will rally the patrol. From a safe
distance, we will watch the Saxons march and fall back to remain clear
of them.Very well,said Hunter.Go now. Good luck.Hunter wheeled his mount
and started back through the trees, with Steve riding beside him. When
they had ridden out of Bedwyrs hearing, Hunter spoke quietly again. This
is excellent for our purposes. After we report to the Dux, we can ride
forward again, ostensibly to rejoin Bedwyr. Instead, we can pursue our
own agenda.You mean track MC 6,said Steve. It sounds perfect to
me.Hunter had no trouble locating Artorius, as the column followed the
winding road through the forest. The ride was as uneventful as the
return ride the previous day had been. Hunter and Steve fell into step
with Artorius on the march and Hunter reported quickly.Well done,said
Artorius. He wore the same plain steel cap and leather armor as his men.
I expect the Saxons are marching overland to reach this very road. When
they reach it, they hope it will lead straight to the heart of our
land-which it would, if we were not here to meet them.Hunter said
nothing, waiting.Artorius smiled grimly, looking up the road. Well,
then. We will march forward for another hour, until the next couriers
from Bedwyr arrive to tell us if I am right. In the meantime, we will
watch for open country, where we can use our mobility to the greatest
advantage. When we know for certain where to find the Saxons, we will
prepare a welcome for them.May we have leave to rejoin our patrol?Hunter
asked politely.I have a message for you to take,said Artorius. You will
precede us only by a short distance now. By the time you find them
again, they will have fallen back almost to the point where we are
likely to meet. Since you can take the road for the first part of this
route, you will move faster than you did riding overland through the
forest. Tell Bedwyr to select a good battle site if he can. He will know
what to look for-open country with high ground for us.Very well,said
Hunter.Go now.Hunter kicked his mount, leading Steve up the road at a
canter.When they had left the column behind, Steve called out to Hunter.
Does this mean we cant look for Jane or MC 6 now, after all?First we
must give the message to Bedwyr,said Hunter. He must receive this
instruction.It doesnt sound that important. Wont Bedwyr know to look for
a good battleground? He knows what hes doing.I expect so, but I cannot
take the chance,said Hunter. If we had not come back to this time, he
would have sent other messengers to report to Artorius. We must assume
that they would have obeyed Artoriuss order to give this message to
Bedwyr. I cannot risk failing the instruction.This is ridiculous,said
Steve. We arent getting anywhere.Together, they cantered on up the
road.Ishihara led Wayne and Jane on MC 6s trail all morning. From what
Ishihara could tell by the freshness of the tracks, they were not
catching up; the small component robot could move faster through the
dense forest than the mule and its riders. However, Ishihara did see
that MC 6 continued to stay near the road, zigzagging through the trees
near it. Finally Ishihara quit pursuing MC 6 through the trees and
simply moved up along the side of the road. They moved parallel to the
head of the column.MC 6 has some purpose regarding the army,said
Ishihara. We do not need to follow his tracks. Sooner or later, he will
return to the road somewhere in front of us.He wants to stop the coming
battle,said Wayne. As hopeless as any attempt by him will be. At some
point, probably soon, I think he will approach Artorius and ask him to
negotiate peace with his enemy.I do not see how,said Ishihara. A man at
the wagons told me he does not seem to have learned to speak the local
language. MC 6 has only communicated with gestures.Maybe hes listening
carefully and learning on the sly,said Wayne.Jane, again riding behind
Wayne, said nothing. She had remained silent all morning.How do you
feel?Ishihara asked.Im fine,said Wayne.Im starved,said Jane. Since we
ate the last of our food last night, you know we cant go on
indefinitely. If I go much longer without food, you know Ill be
harmed.Dont pay any attention,said Wayne. She can go without a meal or
two, just like I can. Lets get MC 6 today and then worry about
it.Agreed,said Ishihara. He knew Jane had a point, but they were close
to MC 6 and Hunter did not seem to be nearby. Ishihara expected to find
MC 6 soon. For now, he led them forward, keeping track of the head of
the column.Early in the afternoon, a clear sound of jogging footsteps
reached Ishihara from the road in front of the column. Ishihara signaled
for Wayne to halt and slipped quietly through the trees so that he could
see the road.MC 6 stood in the center of the muddy road, holding out his
arms. Several of the men riding with Artorius shouted for him to stand
aside. The small robot did not move, however, and finally Artorius
himself raised his hand for the column to halt, and reined in.Who are
you, fellow? Do you have news of the Saxons?Artorius looked at MC 6
sternly but not angrily.MC 6 responded in the same language; Ishihara
guessed that he must have learned it the same way Ishihara had. Many
people will die and many more will be injured in the coming war. Please
avoid the violence. Speak with your enemies and search for agreements.
You need not fight with them.The man is crazed,a man next to Artorius
said quietly. At night, he may howl at the moon.Perhaps he has been
touched by the gods,Artorius answered softly. Then he raised his voice.
Have you any news, friend? Any word that the Saxons seek peace?No,said
MC 6. But if you make the first offer, they might listen.I fear not, my
friend,said Artorius. He sounded resigned rather than hostile. If they
did not wish to fight, they would not keep coming across the Channel to
take what we have. And if we do not stop them here, they will kill us
and our families.Artorius signaled for the column to advance. Stand
aside, friend.MC 6 obeyed, but he called out to Artorius again to parley
with the enemy. Artorius ignored him as he rode past. MC 6 jogged
alongside, still speaking to him, but no one listened to him now.
Finally, MC 6 turned and slipped into the forest again, far up the
road.Ishihara understood that MC 6s effort was naive and simplistic. As
a robot himself, however, he also knew that the First Law did not offer
any advice on how to prevent a war. It only dictated that a robot must
not allow harm to humans, leaving the means up to the individual
robot.If Hunters team and Wayne and Ishihara did not interfere with MC
6, he would eventually try again to prevent violence. If no one stopped
him, he might eventually gain the trust of Artorius or a Saxon leader,
and actually succeed in lessening the destruction. He just had not had
time yet to work out a way to accomplish this. Ishihara saw more clearly
than ever that to preserve their own time, they could not allow him to
remain here.A shift in the hoofbeats of the column got his attention.
When he looked, he realized that orders had been given for different
troops of riders to leave the road and fan out to each side. Ishihara
suspected that the Saxon army had been located nearby.He waved for Wayne
to ride up behind him. As the riders changed formation, MC 6 would be
unnoticed in the confusion. It would be a good time to catch him unaware
and distracted. However, they would have to avoid the riders themselves
while they tried to catch the robot.Steve and Hunter rode back to Bedwyr
with their message. They found Bedwyrs patrol waiting for both the
Saxons and Artorius at the far edge of a large, wide clearing. It did
not have much of a slope in any direction, but no trees would block the
charge of Artoriuss riders. The road ran right through the middle of the
clearing.Soon after Steve and Hunter arrived, they caught the first
glimpses of Artoriuss riders at the edge of the clearing behind them.
However, they no longer rode up the road in a column. Instead, they had
already taken positions in the trees and now waited for the Saxons to
advance into the clearing.I was right,Steve muttered. Bedwyr picked a
battle site on his own. He didnt need the message we brought from
Artorius.The fact remains that we fulfilled our historical role,Hunter
whispered back.Another rider in the patrol trotted out of the trees
ahead of them and stopped next to Bedwyr. They spoke too quietly for
Steve to hear. Then Bedwyr turned and waved for his patrol to pull back.
To their rear, a man next to Artorius waved for them to come.Steve and
Hunter followed him at a trot across the clearing. The patrol halted at
the trees where Artoriuss riders stood waiting. From here, Steve saw
that the trees were filled with riders.Good work, Bedwyr,said Artorius.
As always. I want you and your men to ride from here as we charge.We are
honored,said Bedwyr.The other riders around Artorius made room for the
patrol. Bedwyr and his men turned their horses and waited, also. Ahead
of them, the clearing remained empty. However, birds fluttered out of
the trees beyond it,This clearing isnt very big,said Steve quietly. Only
the front of the enemy line can be trapped here.Its the biggest open
area in the vicinity,said Bedwyr, with a shrug. It will do.Cant they
hear the horses? Or dont they have patrols that have seen us?Steve
asked. They must know were here.They have seen our patrol, and others,
from time to time today,said Bedwyr. But they cant know exactly where
Artorius will meet them. With our advantage in mobility, we dont have to
find an ideal battleground. If we panic the front of their line, the
others will be thrown into confusion. Then we can ride them down.Steve
said nothing else. After all, according to Harriets history, Artorius
had succeeded. These guys knew what they were doing.The task never seems
to end,said Artorius.Bedwyr looked at him.We have often said, Bedwyr,
that the Saxons come on like waves of the sea. Every year we defeat
them, yet the next year we face more of them than ever.You have never
lost a battle to them,said Bedwyr. Youre the kind of leader bards sing
about.Artorius gazed grimly into the distance. I wonder. Bards sing
about great victories, not those who fight forever with no success. I
wonder if anyone will ever remember our names.Steve smiled but did not
dare answer.20Hunter heard the advancing march of thousands of Saxon
feet while the Britons around him still spoke quietly among themselves,
unaware of their enemy. The coming battle caused Hunters tension under
the First Law to rise, but he focused his attention on Steve. When the
charge began, they would have to ride forward with the riders or risk
colliding with those behind them. However, as soon as they could lose
themselves in the confusion of battle, Hunter would take Steve off to
one side. Their search for MC 6 and Jane could begin in earnest.The men
around Hunter stiffened suddenly. Ahead of them, the Saxons came
tramping down the road, out of the forest. They, too, looked around
warily, aware that their enemy lay near.Suddenly a rider right behind
Artorius raised an old, dented Roman post horn and blew an alarm. As the
riders whooped and charged up the road, leveling their spears, Hunter
and Steve kicked their mounts and rode with them. Ahead of them, the
Saxons in the front swung their long lances down to a horizontal
position or hefted their spears and threw them. Then they braced
themselves for the impact. Arrows flew from the ranks behind them.Hunter
allowed his mount to canter forward, but reined in to keep his speed
down. Next to him, Steve did the same, leaning low to avoid arrows and
spears; riders behind them rushed past, shouting and screaming. Then, up
ahead, the clash of men, horses, and weapons reached Hunter. On each
side of the road, riders charged across the clearing and into the trees,
then turned toward the road to catch the marching Saxons on the
flanks.Follow me!Hunter shouted to Steve. He angled to one side, and
Steve rode after him away from the road. None of the riders paid
particular attention to them; now that the battle had been joined, the
riders in the rear ranks were picking their way among the trees to find
a route to the action.Hunter led Steve out to the far left flank of
riders, then entered the trees. The sounds of fighting were clear, but
the men and horses were out of sight. Steve rode up next to him and they
stopped.A quick motion in the trees ahead caught Hunters attention.Now
can we look for MC 6?Steve demanded. Its now or never, isnt it?No need
to look,said Hunter, pointing forward through the trees. I glimpsed him
over here a moment ago. There he is. Come on!Hunter kicked his mount and
bent down low under the branches. MC 6 jogged through the trees toward a
group of five Saxons, who turned at the sound of hoofbeats to defend
themselves. Hunter judged that MC 6 still hoped to prevent harm to some
of the humans somehow. Steve circled away from them, on a path to drive
MC 6 back toward Hunter.The Saxon warriors also dodged away from him.
Instead of fleeing, however, they ran toward Hunter, fanning out among
the trees so that the trunks protected them. Hunter just wanted to ride
by them after MC 6, but he had no chance. Two spears came flying at him
at once; he caught one on his shield and twisted in the saddle a second
later to avoid the second.A third Saxon threw a spear. While Hunter
knocked it away with his shield, the first two Saxons ran toward him
with their short swords raised.Hunter swung his spear in a low arc,
knocking their sword blades aside; they were startled to see him ride
past them instead of pausing to fight.MC 6 had darted away from Steve
and came running up behind the Saxons.Stop! Stop fighting!MC 6 called
out. You must not hurt each other!Dont move,Steve shouted. Under the
Second Law, I order you to stop and join me! A First Law imperative
requires that you cooperate long enough to hear me explain.As Hunter
dodged two more Saxons running alongside him, slashing at his legs, he
saw MC 6 turn and run to Steve. The danger of battle and his plan to
communicate with humans had forced MC 6 to keep his hearing turned on.
Past them, Hunter also spotted Ishihara running toward them. In a tree
branch behind Ishihara, Wayne and Jane sat together about four meters
above the ground, over a mule.Steve!Hunter shouted as he raised his
shield and swung his spear back and forth to block the sword-strokes of
his attackers. Ishihara is behind you!Hunter tried to ride forward
again, but one of the Saxons had grabbed his bridle, holding his mount.
Hunter could not advance without harming the Saxons.Come on!Steve yelled
to MC 6. He dropped his spear so he could reach down with one arm to
help the robot mount. Swing up here!Hunter defended himself from the
Saxons as they tried to pull him off his horse. He backed his mount away
from them and flung his spear in front of a Saxon, to make him back
away. Then he drew his sword and blocked the swords of the remaining
Saxons.Because Hunter still carried the teams belt unit, Steve could not
take MC 6 home on the spot. Besides, Hunter could not trigger it until
Steve and MC 6 were much closer to him and their horses and the Saxons
were out of range of the unit. Hunter heard other riders coming toward
them now; he hoped they would drive the Saxons back.Ishihara had stopped
about ten meters away when MC 6 mounted behind Steve. Hunter guessed
that Ishiharas need to protect Wayne and Jane on the edge of the battle
had interfered with his instructions to get MC 6, especially now that
Steve already had him.Get him!Wayne yelled. Ishihara, get MC 6!Steve
finally turned and saw Ishihara. Stay away! Back off!Then he turned and
rode toward Hunter.Ishihara remained where he was. Other riders appeared
out of the trees, shouting as they leaned low under tree branches. They
rode toward Hunter.Not too close!Hunter called to Steve as he continued
to fight the Saxons around him defensively.Hunter swung his shield
outward, pushing back one of the men on his left. At the same moment, he
blocked the sword of a man on his right. He saw a spear coming toward
him from a third Saxon also on his left and ducked to his right, but the
motions of his arms were already committed and the momentum prevented
him from avoiding the spear.The heavy spear smashed into his left
shoulder and he instantly felt a loss of control over his shoulder and
arm. His energy level also dropped suddenly as some of his electrical
circuits were severed. Though his awareness level did not change, he
could no longer raise his shield. He felt the Saxons grab his limp left
arm and pull. Afraid that some of his internal robotic parts would
become exposed to them if he resisted, he allowed himself to be dragged
off his mount to the ground.Steve stopped several yards from Hunter with
MC 6, confident that Hunter would fight his way free of the Saxons and
join him.Get down and stay with me,Steve ordered MC 6. As soon as the
component robot had jumped to the ground, Steve dismounted. Then he
looked up and saw Hunter wrenched from his horse by two Saxons. One of
them raised his sword to slash at Hunter; Steve drew his sword and
cocked his arm to throw it. Hey! Hey, you!No.MC 6 grabbed his arm and
held it fast. Do not harm anyone.Suddenly, before the Saxons struck
Hunter, they saw the other riders bearing down on them. The Saxons broke
and ran as the riders closed in behind them.Steve waited until Hunter
had been left alone. Then he stuck his sword back into his belt and ran
to Hunter. Come on!MC 6 followed.In another moment, the riders had moved
out of sight. Shouts and the clash of weapons resounded through the
trees nearby, but the movement of the battle had shifted the lines away
from them. Suddenly Steve found himself with MC 6 and Hunter damaged on
the ground in front of him.Hunter, can you hear me? Can I pullout the
spear? Or will that make it worse?Pull it out straight, please,Hunter
said calmly.Ishihara! Get back here,Wayne called. He stood a distance
away through some trees, near the mule. Jane and Wayne remained on a
tree branch above them.Steve took the spear shaft in his hands but
looked back over his shoulder. Jane! Come on!Im coming!She jumped off
the branch suddenly, dodging Waynes arm as he grabbed for her. However,
as she tried to run toward Steve and Hunter, Ishihara blocked her way.
She could not possibly beat his robotic reflexes and speed. In a moment,
Ishihara had taken her arm, and he began to pull her back toward the
mule.Steve almost let go of the spear shaft to run to her, but realized
that he could not help right now. If he approached Ishihara with MC 6,
then Ishihara would try to grab the component robot and might succeed;
he still followed Waynes orders under the Second Law. Steve also feared
that if he left MC 6 with Hunter and ran to help Jane, Ishihara would
dodge around Steve and would either catch MC 6 or at least chase him
away. Then Steve would have to start over again-maybe without Hunters
help.Steve decided he would have to get Jane away from Wayne later. He
drew the spear out slowly, as straight as he could. Then he knelt and
unlaced Hunters leather armor. He loosened it enough to fumble in
Hunters clothes for the torso panel that hid the belt unit.Another
glance over his shoulder told him that Wayne and Ishihara had taken Jane
out of sight. Their mules hoofbeats had been camouflaged by the sounds
of battle. Those sounds had grown more distant as Artoriuss riders drove
the Saxons back.Heres the deal, Hunter,said Steve. Ill get the belt unit
out and take us all back to our own time. We can secure MC 6, get you
repaired, and then come back just a minute after we left to rescue
Jane.No.Hunter took Steves wrist in his other hand and stopped him.
Listen carefully. I have identified a new problem. I have been running
my self-diagnostic programs and I cannot be returned to our time in this
condition.Why not? Youre a robot-its not like moving an injured human.
Even if we do a little more damage moving you, we can still get you
repaired.That is not what I mean,said Hunter. The trauma damage has
triggered a more critical problem, according to the monitors that study
my functions on a microscopic level. My system will explode with nuclear
force if I return to our own time this way.What? That doesnt make any
sense.Realizing that they could not leave before talking this out, Steve
drew his hand away and glanced around.No one remained in sight. MC 6
stood motionless over Hunter and Steve. For the moment, they could talk
safely.I dont get it, Hunter,said Steve. You said the instability in the
atoms of the component robots resulted from the particle shower in the
time travel sphere, which combined the miniaturization process and
travel through time. You havent been miniaturized at all. So whats going
on?I have limited information with which to work,said Hunter. However, I
surmise that some of my atoms have been made similarly unstable by the
repeated trips I have taken. Trauma from the spear has destroyed the
shielding on a specific location in my shoulder. The unstable atoms in
that area are the ones that will explode in the particle shower if I
return.You mean this is the opposite problem of the component
robots,said Steve. They can go home safely in the particle shower, but
theyll explode if they go through time normally to reach the moment they
left. Youre saying you cant use the belt unit, but you could wait around
for hundreds of years safely?That is correct.Well...cant we shield it
again? Maybe MC 6 can handle the precision required.That should be
possible,said Hunter. I can direct him continuously by radio as he
works.So thats what you want to do?Steve asked quietly. He did not want
to lose Hunter, but he understood that arguing with him about the Laws
of Robotics was a waste of time.Not yet. I want to hear Janes expertise
as a roboticist. As I said, I am working with limited information. I may
be wrong. If so, then my parts mightexplode with nuclear force when they
reach the time I left on our current mission, as the component robots
have.Maybe MC 6 can understand the damage.Telling him is important in
any case; even Jane would only understand the principles, not retain all
the precise numbers. If I sustain further damage or energy loss, this
information should be available elsewhere.Steve turned to MC 6. Listen
to everything he says and remember it.Acknowledged,said MC 6.I am
transferring the data by radio link rather than speech,said Hunter. It
will be much faster. In fact, we are finished.Look, Hunter, can you get
up and move? The only visible damage is in your shoulder. Do your legs
work?Technically, yes. Most of my body remains mechanically sound.
However, a number of electrical circuits have been broken, some of which
normally access my energy storage. I am able to reroute only minimal
energy. While I might be able to walk upright for a short distance, the
danger of falling and causing greater trauma is high.You shouldnt
move.Not if I can avoid it.I see. MC 6, I want to talk about you,said
Steve. Shut down your hearing and vision. Ill have Hunter radio you to
turn them on again; when he conveys my message, it will also have Second
Law force.Acknowledged,said MC 6.Can we really trust MC 6 to make your
repairs?Steve asked. What if he makes some interpretation of the First
Law on his own without telling us and sabotages you? Then well all be
stuck here.That is the clinching argument we need that he must
cooperate,said Hunter. The First Law will neither allow him to change
history nor to harm you, Wayne, and Jane by stranding you. He must
repair my condition so that we can all go back.All right. We have to
make sure you and MC 6 are safe, then. And I still have to get Jane away
from Wayne somehow.We must also return for Harriet,said Hunter. First,
however, I must warn you that I hear Waynes footsteps approaching to
your left, in the trees about nine meters away. From my position here on
the ground, I cannot see him.21Steve turned to look. Wayne stopped
warily in the trees, watching him. He had picked up a Saxon sword and
shield, probably from a fresh corpse.Hunter, shut down your hearing and
vision.Steve forced his voice to remain calm. Turn them back on when I
tap you on the arm three times quickly.I cannot. Danger is present.
Under the First Law, I must be able to help.You cant help, anyway,said
Steve. Not now. And I have a chance to complete our mission.How?Never
mind how. I can do this more efficiently if I dont have to worry about
you interfering. Do it.Is a First Law imperative involved?If I complete
our mission, then the First Law danger to the whole line of history to
come will be finished. Now shut up and do it.Hunter said nothing
more.Steve realized, belatedly, that ordering Hunter to shut up meant
that the big robot would not acknowledge whether or not he had agreed to
shut down his hearing and vision.If you still hear me, say so,said
Steve.Hunter still said nothing.Steve looked through the trees at Wayne
again. Obviously, Wayne had come prepared to fight if necessary. Steve
decided that Wayne must have ordered Ishihara to take Jane far enough
away so that the robot would not realize Wayne intended to risk getting
into a fight. Wayne had seen Hunter go down with a spear in his shoulder
and Wayne could control MC 6 under the Second Law. That meant he had
come to fight Steve.Wayne walked toward him slowly, still watching the
robots.Slowly, Steve drew his sword from his belt and shifted his shield
on his arm to make it more comfortable. He doubted that Wayne would be
any match for him in hand-to-hand combat; after all, Wayne worked in
offices and laboratories as a roboticist. Steve was younger, in better
shape, and had practiced with his sword and shield in Luciuss
troop.Wayne had not taken a helmet. His head remained bare. As he
approached, a light breeze tossed his hair slightly.Seeing that Wayne
had neither a helmet nor any armor, Steve realized his own disadvantage.
He really did not want to hurt Wayne. That did not mean he could expect
the same consideration in return.Wayne stopped about three meters away.
He watched Steve silently for a moment. Then he glanced again at the
motionless robots.Hi, Wayne.Steve grinned and spoke casually, as though
nothing unusual was about to happen.Wayne scowled. Are they really going
to let us fight? I see Hunter cant help you, but what about MC 6?I told
MC 6 to shut down his sight and hearing so I could talk to Hunter. And
thats the way we want it. If he interfered with us, he might also get
away again. But we dont have to fight. Lets talk about this for a
change.Forget it. Step aside and let me have my own creation.You know I
cant. Why dont you and Jane help me take care of Hunter? I dont think
anybody wants to ruin your career. Hunter can help you work out the
situation with the Oversight Committee,Waynes face contorted with anger.
He raised his sword and ran at Steve.Startled by the suddenness of
Waynes mood shift, Steve raised his shield just in time to take a hard
sword blow. The power of it hurt his arm and he felt a surge of
excitement. In return, he swung his own sword in a high, downward
slash.Wayne blocked the swing with his own shield, shifting to Steves
left. They exchanged rhythmic blows, each one catching the others sword
on his shield. Wayne kept moving to one side, toward MC 6, and Steve
shuffled laterally to stay between them.Steve realized that this could
go on for a long time. Wayne would eventually tire before he would, but
Steve did not want to wait. If anyone else came back this way, most
likely Artoriuss riders, the entire situation would become harder to
handle.Wayne swung his sword another time, the same way he had done
before. Steve caught it on his shield again. Instead of just swinging
his own, however, Steve planted his feet and took another step forward,
shoving his shield outward like a weapon itself.Caught by surprise,
Wayne stumbled backward. His arms flailed out to each side as he tried
to get his balance. He was momentarily exposed.Steve raised his sword
high, but brought it down with the butt end of the handle first. He hit
Wayne on the top of the head with the pommel, as hard as he dared. Then
he dropped his sword and pushed Wayne with his free hand.Wayne fell onto
his back. Steve wrenched the sword out of his hand and tossed it away.
Then he made a fist, ready to punch Wayne if necessary.When Steve saw
Wayne lying limply on the grass, he relaxed slightly.Hows your
head?Steve asked cautiously.Leave me alone,Wayne muttered, wincing. He
made no move to get up.Steve decided Wayne was not seriously injured. He
stood up and dropped his shield on the ground. Then he picked up both
swords and jogged back to Hunter so that Wayne could not reach the
swords by a sudden move. Steve dropped the swords on the ground and
tapped Hunter on the arm three times.I have turned on my hearing and
vision again,said Hunter. What has transpired?Good news,said Steve.
Wayne is lying nearby with a minor headache. MC 6 remains in custody;
instruct him to turn on his senses again.I am fully functional again,MC
6 said almost immediately.Listen carefully,said Steve. Hunter, explain
to him all the First Law imperatives involved in the danger of changing
history. Do it fast, by radio again.Done,said Hunter.You agree this is a
serious First Law problem?Steve asked MC 6.Yes.Then I instruct you, with
that First Law imperative in mind, to help me gather everyone who has
come to this time from our own and take them back safely.
Acknowledge.Acknowledged.Go see if Wayne Nystrom, over there, needs any
first aid. Dont let him get away, though. Keep him here with us.MC 6
jogged over to Wayne.Hunter, call Ishihara. If he answers, tell him that
Wayne has been slightly hurt and that he and MC 6 are both in our
custody. Waynes mission has ended, so Ishiharas First Law imperative now
is to bring Jane back to us.Ishihara has responded. I am conveying your
mission as I speak to you. He agrees, pending his judgment that we have
told the truth.Whats he going to do?He will approach cautiously. Once he
sees that we have Wayne and MC 6 with us, he will be convinced.Steve
could not hear any more sounds from the battle. Hunter, can you hear the
battle? Is it still going on?I hear distant hoofbeats, most of them
still scattering away from us. Most of the riders are pursuing their
fleeing enemy. A few have regrouped. Artorius clearly won another
victory. No one is near except for the footsteps of Ishihara and the
hoofbeats of the mule, about ten meters behind you.Steve turned and saw
Jane riding the mule next to Ishihara. Deciding that Hunter was safe for
the moment, Steve ran toward Jane. She slipped off the mule, landing on
her feet in front of him. He started to throw his arms around her, but
was not sure he should, so he stopped.So, youre safe,he said, feeling
awkward.Yeah.She laughed, looking at him expectantly for a moment. Then
she looked past him to Hunter. Ishihara relayed Hunters report of his
condition.MC 6 says he can shield the problem area, whatever it is.Steve
glanced over her shoulder at Ishihara. Are you sure of Ishiharas loyalty
now?Yes. I grilled him on the subject when he told me that you and
Hunter had Wayne and MC 6.Okay. Youd know better than I would.I will
help everyone return safely,said Ishihara. However, I hope that Waynes
career is not destroyed. That would harm him.No one has ever wanted that
to happen,said Jane.Wayne pushed himself up to a sitting position,
rubbing the top of his head where Steve had hit him. MC 6 stood over
him. They both looked at Ishihara and Jane.Ishihara, MC 6 must make a
repair for Hunter,said Jane. If we can trust you not to accept any
arguments from Wayne about the First Law, then I can allow you to watch
over him.Aw, shut up,Wayne muttered. Ive had enough. You got MC 6 and
all the rest of them. I just want to go home.Well, Ishihara?Jane
demanded. Acknowledge that our First Law arguments supersede anything
Wayne has ever told you.Under the new conditions that pertain, I
acknowledge this.Good.You stay with Wayne, then,said Steve. MC 6, tome
over to Hunter and make the repairs in communication with him.Yes,said
MC 6, joining them.Are you going to need tools of any kind?Jane asked.I
will have to fashion some sort of precision tools,said MC 6. He knelt by
Hunter and moved aside a fold of Hunters tunic to examine the damage to
Hunters shoulder. I can use some material from Hunters body that has
already been rendered waste matter by the damage.Go ahead,said Jane. On
your own judgment.We will confer by radio link,said Hunter.Steve sat
down next to MC 6, giving him plenty of room to move his arms as
necessary. Jane sat down on his other side. They watched in silence as
MC 6 carefully drew out a very thin piece of wire from Hunters wound and
shaped it with his fingers. Then he picked up a slightly heavier piece
of wire and shaped it, also. After that, he used them to manipulate tiny
components inside Hunters shoulder; Steve did not know what any of them
were.Finally MC 6 drew out the small wires and neatly rolled them. After
that, he fastened them inside the wound. Then he moved the tunic back
into place.The shielding is complete,said Hunter. However, he found that
many of my broken circuits cannot be quickly repaired, so my energy
level remains minimal. I am still unable to move around without danger
to myself.But we can all go home now, right?Steve asked. Well get MC 6
back, have you fixed, then return for Harriet.Please go directly to
Harriet with Ishihara,said Hunter. I can hear the baggage train moving
up on the road; that means tonights camp will be made forward of this
position. Jane and MC 6 can tend to Wayne and me safely in this location
for a short time. I prefer to complete this mission all at once. You can
use the belt unit that Ishihara carries. I will have him set it for
Cadbury.All right. Youre the boss.I am communicating with Ishihara now
as you and I speak. However, I must emphasize to you that Harriet must
come back. Her continuing presence endangers the future. I have
explained by radio to Ishihara that he must bring her by force if
necessary.Ill go baby-sit Wayne and send Ishihara over here,said Jane.
She got up and walked back to them.All right.Steve accepted the belt
unit from him. We arent going to see Bedwyr again, are we?No. He will
assume that we were killed in battle.Too bad. I like him.The mule cannot
be taken back to Emrys either,said Ishihara, as he walked up.Who?Steve
asked.The owner of the mule, who loaned it to us. However, this may
equalize the value of labor I contributed to him. Loss of the mule would
in that case mean that our presence made less of a total change in his
life.Please get Harriet,said Hunter. Ishihara, when she has joined you,
return here only a moment after you left. We will be safe here that
long.You do it.Steve moved a few steps away from Hunter and handed
Ishihara the belt unit.Ready?Yes.Harriet followed Gwenhyvaer through the
narrow streets of the village again, looking at the same wares they had
seen before. As Gwenhyvaer fingered the material of a woolen scarf,
Harriet turned and gazed out the open gate of the village, across the
front slope of the tor toward the rolling hills in the distance. She
wondered how the campaign was going, though of course she knew who would
win in the end. When she got a moment alone, she would call Hunter and
see if her lapel pin could still reach him.The lower level of material
comfort here did not bother Harriet. She enjoyed the simple life and the
lack of stress. However, in only a few days, the company she kept had
begun to bore her.As a historian, Harriet had pursued her professional
research and taught a variety of classes. She had debated historical
theories about Arthur both in serious professional forums and also
casually with friends in other fields. Now she had found that none of
the women around her had the slightest interest in the evolution of
societies and values, let alone a desire to hear Harriet discuss
them.Gwenhyvaer talked constantly of her desire to marry Artorius, to
assure herself of what status and privilege she could find. She and the
other women here had a tremendous stake in Artoriuss military successes,
but otherwise they cared nothing for the details. Today, Gwenhyvaer, who
in legend would become the beautiful but tragically flawed queen of
Camelot, had screamed at a young servant girl for spilling mutton stew
on her dress. Now her biggest concern in life was whether to buy another
now or to wait until Artorius came home victorious from his
campaign.Harriet no longer wanted to spend the rest of her life in this
intellectual void.As she looked out the main gate, Steve and a man she
did not know walked through it.22Harriet!Steve ran to her,
grinning.Youre back! But...I didnt see the army ride back.Steve lowered
his voice. My friend here is Ishihara. Everythings under control,
including him; the others are waiting for us near the battlefield.You
came back just to get me.Well, yeah. Im afraid Hunter insisted. Are you
willing to come home?Yes, Im ready.You are?Steves eyebrows shot up in
surprise.Yes.Harriet turned to look once more atGwenhyvaer, who still
had her back turned. Gwenhyvaer.Mm?The young woman glanced back over her
shoulder.Im going to take a quick walk out the gate. All right?Of
course.Gwenhyvaer shrugged and turned her attention back to the wares in
front of her.Good thing she didnt notice me,Steve muttered, as they
walked toward the gate. She might wonder how I got back from the
campaign so fast, when no one else has.Im afraid shes quite busy with a
worry of her own,Harriet said quietly, smiling. I suppose shell wonder
what happened to me, but now that I know her, I dont think shell wonder
long.What? Why not?Steve asked.Lets just say she is rather
self-consumed.As soon as they passed through the main gate, Ishihara
pointed to a couple of trees. That is where Steve and I arrived. No one
noticed us. We will jump back from there, as well.Steve tumbled to the
grass near Hunter and MC 6. Hunter still lay where he had fallen, but
Wayne was now standing with Jane. Next to Steve, Ishihara caught
Harriets arm to stop her from falling.Hunter looked up. All is well?Yes,
Hunter,said Harriet with a wry smile. Im ready to go home. I didnt give
them any trouble.We must go promptly, then,said Hunter. I hear the
footsteps of the camp followers coming up the road. We do not want to be
seen by them. Please leave behind whatever you can from this time
period. I will confer directly with Ishihara and MC 6 so they can take
off my cap and my leather armor.The other two robots carefully crouched
by Hunter to perform those chores.Steve had already dropped his sword
and shield. He took off his steel cap and tossed it down. Then he
unlaced his leather armor and pulled it up over his head, to leave with
the cap.Jane took Waynes arm and escorted him to the group. Wayne
scowled at the ground but allowed Jane to bring him to a spot next to
Hunter. Ishihara and MC 6 also joined them, making room for Harriet.
Steve stood next to MC 6.Hunter reached inside his tunic for his own
belt unit. Now.Hunter felt himself jammed between Ishihara and MC 6 in
the dark sphere. Ishihara and MC 6 quickly opened the crowded sphere and
helped the humans climb out first. Then they carefully lifted out Hunter
and laid him on the couch across the room. Hunter observed that Daladier
recognized Wayne and watched him carefully, aware of Hunters
instructions to make sure Wayne remained in custody.Steve waited
uncertainly, watching Wayne also.Robots are so logical,said Jane. Thats
what I like about them. They dont bear grudges. Now that Ishihara no
longer selects his actions under Waynes First Law argument, hes
perfectly willing to help Hunter and the rest of us.I used to appreciate
that quality in them myself,said Wayne, in a resigned tone. Now Im not
so sure.Jane smiled gently. Well, I dont need to bear a grudge, either.
Im just glad were all home again.Wayne said nothing.Hunter saw by Steves
scowl that he did not feel as charitable toward Wayne. Still, Steve said
nothing to provoke the roboticist. Hunter had figured out that Steve had
hit Wayne over the head and surmised that this had given Steve some
personal satisfaction.Daladier,said Hunter. Wayne should go promptly to
a hospital to be examined. Please keep him in your custody.Of
course.Daladier took Waynes arm. I am calling for a Medical vehicle to
meet us outside right away.Im not hurt bad, but I could use something
for a headache,Wayne said as he walked out of the room with Daladier.I
will call for a Security vehicle to take the rest of us to MC Governors
office,said Hunter. On his internal system, he did so. He also contacted
the city computer and instructed it to reach the members of the Governor
Robot Oversight Committee for a conference call.You need repair worse
than Wayne needs a Medical robot,said Jane. You want to arrange it right
away?First I must complete my mission,said Hunter.I thought youd say
that. All right. Ishihara, MC 6, can you carry Hunter out to the
Security vehicle in front without damaging him further?Yes,said
Ishihara.Ill bring our regular clothes,said Harriet. We can all change
somewhere else.Ill help you with them,said Steve.Lets go,said Jane.The
ride through the calm city streets to MC Governors office was
uneventful. Hunter said nothing at first, monitoring the news as he
rode. Steve sat near him.Are you checking the news?Steve asked. Is
everything okay?Yes,Hunter said Quietly. I hear no sign that any of the
nuclear explosions ever took place. We have completed our mission
successfully, but we have some matters to clear up. I still have to
answer to the Oversight Committee, but the First Law will not allow me
to permit the revelation of time travel to humanity at large.What about
all the historians? They already know. And they arent bound by the Laws
of Robotics.I must confer with them, too. For that matter, what about
Jane and me? We humans are notoriously unreliable.We will discuss it.At
MC Governors office, Ishihara and MC 6 carried Hunter inside, where they
carefully positioned him in the desk chair. The Security detail remained
on duty just outside the door. Steve followed Jane and Harriet inside
and closed the door.Jane,said Hunter. Please give MC 6 instructions to
merge with the other component robots to form Mojave Center Governor and
make him functional again. Make sure that he remains under control, of
course.Of course. MC 6, merge with the others as Hunter has said. As
soon as your merging is complete, have MC Governor become fully
functional but alert for a discussion regarding the First Law. I am
instructing you not to allow MC Governor to do anything other than
listen to us.Acknowledged.MC 6 walked over to the figure formed by the
other five gestalt robots. He made contact, then fluidly slid right into
place, his own physical shape altering slightly.As Hunter watched from
his chair, the entire figure smoothly became one large robot.I am Mojave
Center Governor,he said.You have access to the data from each of your
components?Jane asked.Yes. From my combined data from each component
robot, I already know all of you and what has happened.Good,said Hunter.
From what I overheard when Wayne spoke to MC 1 in the Late Cretaceous,
you-as MC Governor-were in danger of entering an endless loop that
rendered the other Governor robots helpless. Are you aware of this
problem?Yes,said MC Governor.Can you avoid going into this loop?Strictly
by my own choice, I believe I cannot. This is the reason I divided and
fled.If you are given sufficient instructions under the Second Law, can
you avoid it?I estimate that I can. The attraction of this addiction is
that it simulates constant First Law imperatives that I can satisfy.I
understand,said Hunter. Jane, can you give him a real First Law
imperative that will override such simulations?No. Now that hes been
relieved of his duties here in the city and remains in our custody, his
internal actions cant endanger humans or prevent harm to them. No First
Law imperative regarding his thoughts alone now exists.Then give him
whatever pertinent Second Law instructions you can.Listen and obey me
fully,said Jane. Do not leave this room except under specific
instruction from one of us. Do not run any simulation programs. Running
them as practice for genuine First Law imperatives is not a real First
Law matter, SO my instructions under the Second Law take precedence. Do
you acknowledge this?I remain undecided,said MC Governor. Honing my
responses to First Law imperatives may still help me follow the First
Law at some point in the future. However, your Second Law instructions
are sufficient for me to avoid the simulations in the short term.All
right. Then avoid any activity that would lead you to go into the
simulation. Occupy your attention now by calculating the value of pi,
but remain alert for one of the humans here to give you further orders.
As a final instruction, do not reveal the existence of time travel. A
fundamental First Law danger to all of humanity will result from humans
going back into the past in large numbers. Acknowledge that the First
Law prohibits you from revealing time travel.Acknowledged.Good. Begin
your calculation of pi.Value of what?Steve asked. Whats that supposed to
accomplish?Remember pi, from geometry?Harriet said quietly. Its an
endless calculation. Itll just keep him busy.Oh, yeah.
Geometry.Hunter,said Harriet. I think my usefulness to you really ended
quite a long time ago. If you dont mind, Id like to return to my hotel
room.Of course. Please stand by, however, for a conference call among
all our specialists-one paleontologist and five historians. I will be
arranging it shortly.All right.Harriet turned to Steve. Im sorry I wasnt
more of a help, but Im glad everything worked out.You had the
information we needed when we needed it,said Steve. No need to
apologize.Harriet said good-bye to everyone and left.City computer
calling Hunter. The conference call you requested is standing by.Connect
me. Also contact the six specialists I have hired for a similar
conference call.Hunter called Daladier on a different band and
communicated at maximum robotic speed.Daladier here.How is Wayne? Give
me your location.Wayne will be fine. The Medical robots have just
completed diagnostic tests and found no significant injury. They have
provided a mild painkiller and we are now walking down a hall toward the
main door of the clinic.I want Wayne to observe a conference call with
the Oversight Committee. Have you seen any video screens that I can
link?Yes. The main lobby has a large screen.Wait in the lobby and have
Wayne observe the call.Hunter contacted the city computer again and
instructed it to send the conference call to the screen in the clinic
lobby.At the same moment, the four members of the Oversight Committee
appeared on his internal screens.Yes, Hunter?Dr. Redfield, the blonde,
smiled hopefully. Does this mean your mission has been completed?Yes, it
does,said Hunter. He waited while Dr. Redfield, Dr. Chin, Dr. Khanna,
and Professor Post congratulated him. I also have good news to report.
From the preliminary explanation of the flaw in the gestalt robots, I
expect the problem can be eliminated without destroying the memories or
identities of the component robots or the Governors. Unless presently
unforeseeable problems appear during later examination, their system
programming will simply have to include a more narrowly defined set of
priorities involving First Law interpretations.Thats excellent,said Dr.
Chin, tossing her black hair. It means the problem is not as difficult
as we expected.Thats right,said Professor Post, stroking his black
beard. The Governors will not have to be destroyed.Surely the time has
come for a preliminary report, Hunter,said Dr. Khanna. You have done
very well. But with your mission completed, I ask you in full
expectation of an answer: Where did you find the component robots, and
under what circumstances?Hunter had always known this moment would
arrive. His interpretation of the First Law and his judgment of human
frailty prevented him from revealing the existence of time travel. He
also felt that revealing Waynes obstruction of the mission would, in
fact, bring about consequences that would harm Wayne. Now that Hunter
had completed the mission successfully, he saw no reason to allow such
harm. None of Waynes illegal actions in the past, such as kidnapping
Jane, could be proven in a contemporary court of law, so legal action
was not an option. Hunter decided to delete information about Waynes
presence on these missions.The First Law prohibits me from giving a
detailed report,Hunter said in a formal tone.This is an unacceptable
answer,Dr. Khanna said angrily. You have put me off at every request. As
the Oversight Committee, we have a right to this information.The First
Law makes no exceptions,said Hunter.Dr. Khanna drew in a long breath,
his face contorted with anger. Before he could speak again, however, he
was interrupted.Thats true,said Dr. Redfield, stifling a smile. Were all
roboticists here. Apparently Hunter has no choice.I question his
judgment on this matter,Dr. Khanna said with barely controlled rage.
Must we dismantle Hunter to make sure of his efficiency?He reports that
hes completed his assignment successfully,said Dr. Redfield. If that
turns out to be true, then we have no real grounds to question him.I
will have MC Governor shut down and will arrange for him to be shipped
to a lab of your choice,said Hunter.We have to make arrangements
first,said Dr. Chin. Well contact you when we are ready.I suggest we
confer among ourselves,said Professor Post. We should have Hunter sign
off.I must ask a question,said Hunter. Where does Dr. Wayne Nystrom
stand in regard to your deliberations?Nobody can stand him,Dr. Khanna
said, still angry.Thats a personal matter,said Professor Post. In
professional terms, Dr. Nystrom will have to face a detailed review of
his flawed creations.Can you utilize his expertise in your upcoming
research?Hunter asked.Our oversight responsibility must be conducted
without conflict of interest,said Dr. Redfield. However, once our
judgment of existing flaws has been reached, that phase will have ended.
When the repair process begins, we can consider contacting him for
help.Do you have a recommendation, Hunter?Dr. Chin asked, Why do you
ask?I will discuss a possible suggestion with you at a later time,said
Hunter. I will sign off now.Thanks for a great job,Dr. Redfield added,
just before the connection broke.23Without stopping to speak with the
humans in MC Governors office, Hunter called Daladier again. Did Wayne
observe this call successfully?Yes.Is there a phone nearby? I want to
speak with him directly.Yes.Daladier gave Hunter a number to call. Its
right here in the lobby. I will tell Wayne to answer.Hunter called the
number. A moment later, Waynes face appeared on Hunters internal
screen.Yeah?Wayne said cautiously, glaring at Hunter.You are well?Hunter
asked.Well enough. Get to the point, will you?Based on the reaction of
the Oversight Committee, I believe the members will consider your
participation in correcting the flaws of the Governor robots.Dr. Khanna
never liked me. And the feelings mutual. Theyre all jealous of my
accomplishments.If you are willing to participate, I believe they will
work with you. In that event, your career may not be significantly
harmed.Wayne said nothing for a moment, looking at Hunter. Yeah?I will
offer you a deal in exchange for my recommending to the Oversight
Committee that they ask for your help in the repair process.How do you
know theyll bother to repair the Governor robots?Wayne asked, in a less
confrontational tone. I always figured theyd just junk them entirely.I
cannot speak for them,said Hunter. But Or. Redfield raised the subject
of a repair phase on her own. The Oversight Committee appears to have an
open mind on the subject.Well, yeah, I heard her mention that,Wayne said
slowly. What do you want from me in return?I want you to keep the
existence of time travel a secret. The inherent harm to all humans is
clearly immense.Yeah, I know that. But what about the hardware?The First
Law will not allow me to discuss my plans. However, I offer the
proposition that if no evidence of time travel continues to exist,
anyone claiming to have visited the past will sound silly, not to
mention professionally unreliable.Wayne hesitated, then nodded. I hear
the implied threat to my own future, Hunter. All right, you have a
deal.Good. You can find lodging in Mojave Center for the time
being?Yes.Excellent. Feel free to have Daladier continue to assist you.
I will confer with you again later. Hunter out.Hunter, city computer
calling. The second conference call you requested stands by.Please
connect me.Hunter, is everything okay?Jane asked.Yes,Hunter said aloud.
Jane, and Steve, please stand by. In a moment, we will return to the
Bohung Institute.Okay,said Steve.As the six specialists appeared on
Hunters internal link, he greeted each one of them.Whats up, Hunter?Chad
Mora, the paleontologist who had helped find MC 1 in the Late Cretaceous
era, grinned at him. You dont have to find another robot in the age of
dinosaurs, do you?No. We have completed our missions.A chorus of
congratulations came from all of them except Harriet, who of course
already knew that.Im glad, Hunter,said Rita Chavez, who had journeyed to
Jamaica in the time of the buccaneers with the team.I want to thank you
again, Hunter,said Gene Titus. For inviting me along to Roman Germany.
It was a wonderful experience for a historian; I guess we all feel that
way.Thats right,said Judy Taub, who had traveled back to the Battle of
Moscow in 1941 with the team.I still cant believe I met Marco Polo and
Kublai Khan,said Marcia Lew.Have any of you revealed that you traveled
into the past?No one responded; several shook their heads.Its been less
than a week,said Chad. Im still reviewing all the information I
collected.We all know the danger of revealing time travel to the world
at large,said Judy.I made significant discoveries,said Harriet. I may
not be alone in that. But I know you want us to keep this a secret.I
will dismantle the time-travel ability of the sphere shortly,said
Hunter. Of course, I cannot order you to keep this a secret. I can tell
you that no evidence of time travel will exist, however. Certainly none
of us will benefit by having the technology rediscovered.I get the
picture,said Chad. If we claim to have traveled through time, well sound
like cranks or lunatics.As you know, I cannot allow harm to any of
you,said Hunter. So I want you to know that maintaining the secret will
be to your own advantage.I can manage,said Harriet. Even though I cant
prove my information, I know where to pursue more archaeological
research. Maybe I can arrange it.I can, too,said Chad. Paleontology
combines hard evidence with educated guesses all the time. I can advance
my new information as theoretical. Since Im right, no one can disprove
it.He laughed lightly. And I know roughly where to dig next.I didnt
learn much new history as such,said Marcia. I picked up the feel of the
times. That helps me in my work, too.Same for me,said Gene.Yes, I would
say that,added Rita. It all became real.I have further work to do,said
Hunter. Please excuse me for making this farewell so abrupt. I thank you
all.He disconnected and turned to Steve and Jane. We must go back to the
Bohung Institute now. Jane, can we safely leave MC Governor
here?Yes,said Jane. Under the Second Law, he cant violate my instruction
to stay in the room and I dont believe he can come up with a First Law
argument to justify overriding it.Especially while hes calculating
pi?Steve grinned.Right. Besides, Ishihara can stay here to guard him and
that Security detail is still right outside. We can instruct them to
stop MC Governor bodily from leaving if necessary.Please do that as we
leave,said Hunter. Ishihara, remain here with MC Governor. Stop him if
he attempts to leave and call me immediately. Soon I can allow the
Bohung Institute to reopen, at which time you may resume your normal
duties. You know this situation has First Law force.Agreed.We will
go.Steve rode with Hunter and Jane in the same vehicle they had taken to
MC Governors office. Jane had given the Security detail guarding the
office their instructions. Now no one spoke as Hunter drove them back
through the streets of Mojave Center.During the ride, Steve felt out of
place. He had originally been hired because of his experience out doors,
to be part of a team made up of Hunter and city people. At Hunters
request, he had remained part of the team in the later missions. Now,
his contribution had clearly ended. He wondered if he should say
good-bye also, but he did not really want the experience to end yet. The
missions had all been exciting, and he wanted to spend more time with
Jane. On the other hand, he expected that she was anxious to get back
home and return to her normal routine now that the job had ended.At the
Bohung Institute, they returned quickly to Room F-12. Hunter walked to
the console near the sphere and opened it. As he worked inside the
console, Jane stood with Steve watching.Its been a wild adventure,said
Steve. Or six separate ones.I can hardly believe we visited all those
times and places,said Jane. She shook her head slowly. And now its
over.We must hope so,said Hunter as he continued to work. When I have
finished, the sphere will be returned only to its original function of
miniaturization for industrial and medical purposes.And that will be the
end of time travel,said Steve.Only if we are unusually fortunate,said
Hunter. A technological development that is created once can be created
again. Historically, this usually happens. I will impress further on all
the robots who know about our missions that the First Law will not allow
this technology to be restored, revealed, or discussed. Wayne and our
specialists have shown no particular desire to travel in time again.
Beyond that, we can only hope that this technology will be an exception
that no one discovers a second time.But you dont think thats likely,said
Steve.The only reason for optimism is that no one seems motivated to
pursue research in this direction. Maybe that will be reason enough.It
was a great experience for me,said Steve. Id forgotten just how big the
world is. And a society that can make Governor robots and create Hunter
and send people back in time has a lot to offer.Maybe I learned the
opposite,Jane said quietly. Ive worked in an ivory tower of schools and
research labs all my life. The world is much more than robots and
technological theories.Yeah.Steve glanced at Hunter, who was still
working on the console. I guess my part is finished, isnt it,
Hunter?Hunter looked up. Yes. I asked you to accompany me here so I can
return you to your home as soon as I finish.Right.Steve turned to Jane,
feeling awkward. Well, I guess this will be good-bye. I, uh, enjoyed
working with you. A couple of times, I thought we might have a chance to
get better acquainted, but then something always happened.We have time
now.Jane smiled.Uh...dont you have to go home, or something?That can
wait. Would you take me up to see your shack again?My shack?The first
time Hunter took Chad and me up there to meet you, I thought it was a
weird, rickety combination of a primitive shelter and modern
conveniences.Well...Steve grinned. I guess it is.After all weve been
through, I think I might find it downright luxurious now.Its not too
bad.Id like to stay out in nature a little longer without having to
chase robots, too. Maybe you could show me around your desert a
little...if Im welcome.Of course you are.Steve laughed. Id love to have
you come and visit.I am finished here.Hunter closed the console. And now
you two no longer have to worry about changing history.Thats right,said
Steve. Who knows? Maybe we can make our own.}  
