{112521 010331033{}
{;000;00255;0255255;02550;2550255;25500;2552550;255255255;00128;0128128;01280;
1280128;12800;1281280;128128128;192192192;}{}{}119161680072072031251354
120163 1701198402413720 90312532628800000 8 241033103310331033 {
}100240600000 132103310333210331033 {It's Such a Beautiful Day }28800000
8 241033103310331033 {-2-111 }{181 Copyright 'a9 1954 by Ballantine
Books, Inc.}{-2-111 On April 12, 2117, the field-modulator brake-valve
in the Door belonging to }{-2-101 Mrs. Richard Hanshaw depolarized for
reasons unknown. As a result, Mrs. }{-1-91 Hanshaw's day was completely
upset a nd her son, Richard, Jr., first devel-}{-2-101 oped his strange
neurosis.}{ }{-2-111 It was not the type of thing you would find listed
as a neurosis in the usual }{-1-91 textbooks and certainly young Richard
behaved, in most respects, just as a well-brought-up twelve-year-old in
pro sperous circumstances ought to be-}{-3-171 have.}{ }{-1-91 And yet
from April 12 on, Richard Hanshaw, Jr., could only with regret ever
persuade himself to go through a Door.}{ }{-1-91 Of all this, on April
12, Mrs. Hanshaw had no premonition. She woke in }{-2-101 the morning
(an ordinary morning) as her mekkano slithered gently into her }{-1-81
room, with a cup of coffee on a small tray.}{ }{-2-111 Mrs. Hanshaw was
planning a visit to New York in the afternoon and she }{-2-101 had
several things to do first that could not quite be trusted to a mekkano,
so }{-1-71 after one or two sips, she stepped out of bed.}{ }{-1-91 The
mekkano backed away, moving silently along the diamagnetic field }{-1-71
that kept its oblong body half an inch above the floor, and moved back
to }{-1-91 the kitchen, where its simple computer was quite adequate to
set the proper }{0-31 controls on the various kitchen appliances in
order that an appropriate }{-1-91 breakfast might be prepared.}{ }{-1-81
Mrs. Hanshaw, having bestowed the usual sentimental glance upon the}{
}{0-2189 cubograph of her dead husband, passed through the stages of her
morning }{189 ritual with a certain contentment. She could hear her son
across the hall }{0-1189 clattering through his, but she knew she need
not interfere with him. The mekkano was well adjusted to see to it, as a
matter of course, that he was }{ 189 showered, that he had on a change
of clothing, and that he would eat a }{-1-5189 nourishing breakfast. The
tergo-shower she had had installed the year before }{0-2189 made the
morning wash and dry so quick and pleasant that, really, she felt
}{0-4189 certain Dickie would wash even without supervision.}{ }{189 On
a morning like this, when she was busy, it would certainly not be
}{0-3189 necessary for her to do more than deposit a casual peck on the
boy's cheek }{0-1189 before he left. She heard the soft chime the
mekkano sounded to indicate }{189 approaching school time and she
floated down the force-lift to the lower }{0-2189 f loor (her hair-style
for the day only sketchily designed, as yet) in order to perform that
motherly duty.}{ }{189 She found Richard standing at the door, with his
text-reels and pocket }{0-2189 projector dangling by their strap and a
frown on his face.}{ }{0-4189 "Say, Mom," he said, looking up, "I dialed
the school's co-ords but noth-ing happens."}{ }{0-3189 She said, almost
automatically, "Nonsense, Dickie. I never heard of such }{0-1189 a
thing."}{ }{0-3189 "Well, you try."}{ }{189 Mrs. Hanshaw tried a number
of times. Strange, the school Door was }{0-2189 always set for general
reception. She tried other co-ordinates. Her friends' }{0-1189 Doors
might not be set for reception, but there would be a signal at least,
}{0-2189 and then she could explain.}{ }{0-3189 But nothing happened at
all. The Door remained an inactive gray barrier despite all her
manipulations. It was obvious that the Door was out of order }{0-2189
and only five months after its annual fall inspection by the company.}{
}{0-3189 She was quite angry about it.}{ }{0-1189 It }{0-1189 would
}{0-1189 happen on a day when she had so much planned. She thought
}{0-3189 petulantly of the fact that a month earlier she had decided
against installing }{0-2189 a subsidiary Door on the ground that it was
an unnecessary expense. How was she to know that Doors were getting to
be so }{0-2189 shoddy?}{

}{0-2189 She stepped to the visiphone while the anger still burned in
her and said to Richard, "You just go down the road, Dickie, and use the
Williamsons' }{0-4189 Door."}{ }{189 Ironically, in view of later
developments, Richard balked. "Aw, gee, Mom, I'll get dirty. Can't I
stay home till the Door is fixed?"}{ }{0-4189 And, as ironically, Mrs.
Hanshaw insisted. With her finger on the combi-}{0-2189 nation board of
the phone, she said, "You won't get dirty if you put flexies }{189 on
your shoes, and don't forget to brush yourself well before you go into
}{0-2189 their house."}{ }{-1-5189 "But, golly"}{ }{-1-6189 "No
back-talk, Dickie. You've got to be in school. Just let me see you walk
}{0-2189 out of here. And quickly, or you'll be late."}{ }{-1-6189 The
mekkano, an advanced model and very responsive, was already
stand-}{0-3189 ing before Richard with flexies in one appendage.}{
}{0-2189 Richard pulled the transparent plastic shields over his shoes
and moved }{0-3189 down the hall with visible reluctance. "I don't even
know how to work this }{189 thing, Mom."}{

}{189 "You just push that button," Mrs. Hanshaw called. "The red button.
Where it says 'For Emergency Use.' And don't dawdle. Do you want the
}{0-3189 mekkano to go along with you?"}{ }{0-4189 "Gosh, no," he called
back, morosely, "what do you think I am? A baby? }{0-2189 Gosh!" His
muttering was cut off by a slam.}{ }{0-4189 With flying fingers, Mrs.
Hanshaw punched the appropriate combination }{189 on the phone board and
thought of the things she intended saying to the }{0-3189 company about
this. }{ }{0-2189 Joe Bloom, a reasonable young man, who had gone
through technology }{0-1189 school with added training in force-field
mechanics, was at the Hanshaw }{0-2189 residence in less than half an
hour. He was really quite competent, though }{0-3189 Mrs. Hanshaw
regarded his youth with deep suspicion.}{ }{0-4189 She opened the
movable house-panel when he first signaled and her sight }{0-3189 of him
was as he stood there, brushing at himself vigorously to remove the
}{189 dust of the open air. He took off his flexies and dropped them
where he }{0-2189 stood. Mrs. Hanshaw closed the house-panel against the
flash of raw sun-}{0-1189 light that had entered. She found herself
irrationally hoping that the step-}{0-2189 by-step trip from the public
Door had been an unpleasant one. Or perhaps }{0-1189 that the public
Door itself had been out of order and the youth had had to }{0-4189 lug
his tools even farther than the necessary two hundred yards. She wanted
}{189 the Company, or its representative at least, to suffer a bit. It
would teach }{0-1189 them what broken Doors meant.}{ }{189 But he seemed
cheerful and unperturbed as he said, "Good morning, }{0-1189 ma'am. I
came to see about your Door."}{ }{0-1189 "I'm glad someone did," said
Mrs. Hanshaw, ungraciously. "My day is quite ruined."}{ }{189 "Sorry,
ma'am. What seems to be the trouble?"}{ }{-1-5189 "It just won't work.
Nothing at all happens when you adjust co-ords," said }{0-1189 Mrs.
Hanshaw. "There was no warning at all. I had to send my son out to }{189
the neighbors through thatthat thing."}{ }{189 She pointed to the
entrance through which the repair man had come.}{ }{0-4189 He smiled and
spoke out of the conscious wisdom of his own specialized }{189 training
in Doors. "That's a door, too, ma'am. You don't give that kind a capital
letter when you write it. It's a hand-door, sort of. It used to be the
}{0-2189 only kind once."}{ }{0-1189 "Well, at least it works. My boy's
had to go out in the dirt and germs."}{ }{0-3189 "It's not bad outside
today, ma'am," he said, with the connoisseur-like air}{ }{-1-5189 of one
whose profession forced him into the open nearly every day.
"Some-}{0-4189 times it }{0-4189 is }{0-4189 real unpleasant. But 1
guess you want I should fix this here Door, }{189 ma'am, so I'll get on
with it."}{ }{0-1189 He sat down on the floor, opened the large tool
case he had brought in }{0-2189 with him and in half a minute, by use of
a point-demagnetizer, he had the }{ 0-3189 control panel removed and a
set of intricate vitals exposed.}{ }{0-3189 He whistled to himself as he
placed the fine electrodes of the field-ana-}{0-2189 lyzer on numerous
points, studying the shifting needles on the dials. Mrs. }{ 0-4189
Hanshaw watched him, arms folded.}{ }{189 Finally, he said, "Well,
here's something," and with a deft twist, he }{-1-6189 disengaged the
brake-valve.}{ }{-1-5189 He tapped it with a fingernail and said, "This
here brake-valve is depolar-}{0-3189 ized, ma'am. There's your whole
trouble." He ran his finger along the little }{ 0-2189 pigeonholes in
his tool case and lifted out a duplicate of the object he had }{189
taken from the door mechanism. "These things just go all of a sudden.
Can't predict it."}{ }{189 He put the control panel back and stood up.
"It'll work now, ma'am."}{ }{0-2189 He punched a reference combination,
blanked it, then punched another. }{0-4189 Each time, the dull gray of
the Door gave way to a deep, velvety blackness. }{ 0-1189 He said, "Will
you sign here, ma'am? and put down your charge number, }{0-3189 too,
please? Thank you, ma'am."}{ }{189 He punched a new combination, that of
his home factory, and with a }{0-4189 polite touch of finger to
forehead, he stepped through the Door. As his body }{-1-5189 entered the
blac kness, it cut off sharply. Less and less of him was visible and
}{0-4189 the tip of his tool case was the last thing that showed. A
second after he had }{0-3189 passed through completely, the Door turned
back to dull gray.}{ }{0-3189 Half an hour later, when Mrs. Hanshaw had
finally completed her inter-}{0-1189 rupted preparations and was fuming
over the misfortune of the morning, }{0-3189 the phone buzzed annoyingly
and her real troubles began.}{ }{0-4189 Miss Elizabeth Robbins was
distressed. Little Dick Hanshaw had always }{189 been a good pupil. She
hated to report him like this. And yet, she told }{0-3189 herself, his
actions were certainly queer. And she would talk to his mother, }{0-1189
not to the principal.}{ }{0-2189 She slipped out to the phone during the
morning study period, leaving a }{189 student in charge. She made her
connection and found herself staring at }{0-4189 Mrs. Hanshaw's handsome
and somewhat formidable head.}{ }{189 Miss Robbins quailed, but it was
too late to turn back. She said, diffi-}{0-1189 dently, "Mrs. Hanshaw,
I'm Miss Robbins." She ended on a rising note.}{ }{0-1189 Mrs. Hanshaw
looked blank, then said, "Richard's teacher?" That, too, }{0-2189 ended
on a rising note.}{ }{0-2189 "That's right. I called you, Mrs. Hanshaw,"
Miss Robbins plunged right }{0-1189 into it, "to tell you that Dick was
quite late to school this morning."}{ }{0-1189 "He }{0-1189 was?
}{0-1189 But that couldn't be. I saw him leave."}{ }{186 Miss Robbins
looked astonished. She said, "You mean you saw him use the Door?"}{
}{186 Mrs. Hanshaw said quickly, "Well, no. Our Door was temporarily out
of order. I sent him to a neighbor and he used that Door."}{ }{186 "Are
you sure?"}{ }{186 "Of course I'm sure. I wouldn't lie to you."}{ }{186
"No, no, Mrs. Hanshaw. I wasn't implying that at all. I meant are you
sure he found the way to the neighbor? He might have got lost."}{ }{186
"Ridiculous. We have the proper maps, and I'm sure Richard knows the
location of every house in District A-3." Then, with the quiet pride of
one }{0-1186 who knows what is her due, she added, "Not that he ever
needs to know, of }{186 course. The co-ords are all that are necessary
at any time."}{ }{0-2186 Miss Robbins, who came from a family that had
always had to economize }{186 rigidly on the use of its Doors (the price
of power being what it was) and }{0-1186 who had therefore run errands
on foot until quite an advanced age, resented }{186 the pride. She said,
quite clearly, "Well, I'm afraid, Mrs. Hanshaw, that Dick did not use
the neighbor's Door. He was over an hour late to school }{ 0-2186 and
the condition of his flexies made it quite obvious that he tramped
cross-}{186 country. They were }{186 muddy."}{ }{0-1186 "Muddy?"
}{0-1186 Mrs. Hanshaw repeated the emphasis on the word. "What did }{186
he say? What was his excuse?"}{ }{0-1186 Miss Robbins couldn't help but
feel a little glad at the discomfiture of the other woman. She said, "He
wouldn't talk about it. Frankly, Mrs. Hanshaw, }{186 he seems ill.
That's why I called you. Perhaps you might want to have a doctor look at
him."}{ }{186 "Is he running a temperature?" The mother's voice went
shrill.}{ }{186 "Oh, no. I don't mean physically ill. It's just his
attitude and the look in his eyes." She hesitated, then said with every
attempt at delicacy, "I thought perhaps a routine checkup with a psychic
probe"}{ }{186 She didn't finish. Mrs. Hanshaw, in a chilled voice and
with what was as close to a snort as her breeding would permit, said,
"Are you implying that }{-2-141 Richard is }{-2-141 neurotic?"}{ }{186
"Oh, no, Mrs. Hanshaw, but"}{ }{0-1186 "It certainly sounded so. The
idea! He has always been perfectly healthy. }{186 I'll take this up with
him when he gets home. I'm sure there's a perfectly normal explanation
which he'll give to }{ 186 me."}{ }{186 The connection broke abruptly,
and Miss Robbins felt hurt and uncom-}{0-3186 monly foolish. After all
she had only tried to help, to fulfill what she consid-}{186 ered an
obli gation to her students.}{ }{186 She hurried back to the classroom
with a glance at the metal face of the wall clock. The study period was
drawing to an end. English Composition }{-1-6186 next.}{ }{0-1186 But
her mind wasn't completely on English Composition. Automatically, }{186
she called the students to have them read selections from their
literary}{ }{0-1185 creations. And occasionally she punched one of those
selections on tape and }{185 ran it through the small vocalizer to show
the students how English }{185 should }{ 0-1185 be read.}{ }{0-2185 The
vocalizer's mechanical voice, as always, dripped perfection, but, again
as always, lacked character. Sometimes, she wondered if it was wise to
try to }{185 train the students into a speech that was divorced from
individuality and geared only to a mass-average accent and intonation.}{
}{185 Today, ho wever, she had no thought for that. It was Richard
Hanshaw she watched. He sat quietly in his seat, quite obviously
indifferent to his surroundings. He was lost deep in himself and just
not the same boy he had been. It was obvious to her that he had had s o
me unusual experience that morning and, really, she was right to call
his mother, although perhaps she ought not to have made the remark about
the probe. Still it was quite the thing these days. All sorts of people
get probed. There wasn't any disgrace at tached to it. Or there
shouldn't be, anyway.}{ }{0-1185 She called on Richard, finally. She had
to call twice, before he responded }{185 and rose to his feet.}{
}{0-1185 The general subject assigned had been: "If you had your choice
of travel-}{185 ing on some ancient vehicle, which would y ou choose,
and why?" Miss Robbins tried to use the topic every semester. It was a
good one because it carried a sense of history with it. It forced the
youngster to think about the manner of living of people in past ages.}{
}{185 She listened while Richard Hanshaw read in a low voice.}{ }{185
"If I had my choice of ancient vehicles," he said, pronouncing the "h"
in vehicles, "I would choose the stratoliner. It travels slow like all
vehicles but it is clean. Because it travels in the stratosphere, it
must be all enclosed so that you are not likely to catch disease. You
can see the stars if it is night time almost as good as in a
planetarium. If you look down you can see the Earth like a map or maybe
see clouds" He went on for several hundred }{ 0-4185 more words.}{
}{0-1185 She said brightly when he had finished reading, "It's
pronounced vee-ick-}{185 ulls, Richard. No 'h.' Accent on the first
syllable. And you don't say 'travels slow' or 'see good.' What do you
say, class?" }{ }{185 There was a small chorus of responses and she went
on, "That's right. Now what is the difference between an adjective and
an adverb? Who can tell me?"}{ }{185 And so it went. Lunch passed. Some
pupils stayed to eat; some went home. Richard stayed. Miss Robbins noted
that, as usually he didn't.}{ }{185 The afternoon passed, too, and then
there was the final bell and the usual }{0-2185 upsurging hum as
twenty-five boys and girls rattled their belongings together }{185 and
took their leisurely place in line.}{ }{185 Miss Robbins clapped her
hands together, "Quickly, children. Come, Zelda, take your place."}{
}{185 "I dropped my tape-punch, Miss Robbins," shrilled the girl,
defensively.}{ }{187 "Well, pick it up, pick it up. Now children, be
brisk, be brisk."}{ }{187 She pushed the button that slid a section of
the wall into a recess and }{0-1187 revealed the gray blankness of a
large Door. It was not the usual Door that }{187 the occasional student
used in going home for lunch, but an advanced }{0-1187 model that was
one of the prides of this well-to-do private school.}{ }{0-3187 In
addition to its double width, it possessed a large and impressively
gear-filled "automatic serial finder" which was capable of adjusting the
door for a }{0-1187 number of different co-ordinates at automatic
intervals.}{ }{187 At the beginning of the semester, Miss Robbins always
had to spend an afternoon with the mechanic, adjusting the device for
the co-ordinates of the h omes of the new class. But then, thank
goodness, it rarely needed attention for the remainder of the term.}{
}{187 The class lined up alphabetically, first girls, then boys. The
Door went velvety black and Hester Adams waved her hand and stepped
through. }{-1-9187 "By-y-y"}{ }{187 The "bye" was cut off in the middle,
as it almost always was.}{ }{187 The Door went gray, then black again,
and Theresa Cantrocchi went through. Gray, black, Zelda Charlowicz.
Gray, black, Patricia Coombs. }{0-2187 Gray, black, Sara May Evans.}{
}{0-3187 The line grew smaller as the Door swallowed them one by one,
depositing }{0-2187 each in her home. Of course, an occasional mother
forgot to leave the house }{ 0-1187 Door on special reception at the
appropriate time and then the school Door }{0-3187 remained gray.
Automatically, after a minute-long wait, the Door went on to }{ 0-1187
the next combination in line and the pupil in question had to wait till
it was }{187 all over, after which a phone call to the forgetful parent
would set things }{0-1187 right. This was always bad for the pupils
involved, especially the sensitive }{187 ones who took seriously the
implication that they were little thought of at home. Miss Robbins
always tried to impress this on visiting parents, but it happened at
least once every semester just the same.}{ }{187 The girls were all
through now. John Abramowitz stepped through and then Edwin Byrne}{
}{187 Of course, another trouble, and a more frequent one was the boy or
girl who got into line out of place. They }{187 would }{187 do it
despite the teacher's sharpest watch, particularly at the beginning of
the term when the proper }{0-2187 order was less familiar to them.}{
}{0-41 When that happened, children would be popping into the wrong
houses }{-1-51 by the half-dozen and would have to be sent back. It
always meant a mixup }{0-31 that took minutes to straighten out and
parents were invariably irate.}{ }{0-41 Miss Robbins was suddenly aware
that the line had stopped. She spoke }{0-21 sharply to the boy at the
head of the line.}{ }{0-31 "Step through, Samuel. What are you waiting
for?"}{ }{0-11 Samuel Jones raised a complacent countenance and said,
"It's not my }{-1-51 combination, Miss Robbins."}{ }{-2-111 "Well, whose
is it?" She looked impatiently down the line of five remain-}{-2-101 ing
boys. Who was out of place?}{ }{-1-81 "It's Dick Hanshaw's, Miss
Robbins."}{ }{-1-71 "Where is he?"}{ }{-2-111 Another boy answered, with
the rather repulsive tone of self-righteousness }{-2-101 all children
automatically assume in reporting the deviations of their friends
}{-1-71 to elders in authority, "He went through the fire door, Miss
Robbins."}{ }{-1-81 "What?"}{ }{-2-101 The schoolroom Door had passed on
to another combination and Samuel }{-1-91 Jones passed through. One by
one, the rest followed.}{ }{-2-101 Miss Robbins was alone in the
classroom. She stepped to the fire door. It was a small affair, manually
operated, and hidden behind a bend in the wall }{-1-71 so that it would
not break up the uniform structure of the room.}{ }{-2-101 She opened it
a crack. It was there as a means of escape from the building in case of
fire, a device which was enforced by an anachronistic law that did not
take into account the modern methods of automatic fire-fighting that all
}{-1-61 public buildings used. There was nothing outside, but the
outside The }{-2-101 sunlight was harsh and a dusty wind was blowing.}{
}{-2-121 Miss Robbins closed the door. She was glad she had called Mrs.
Hanshaw. }{-1-91 She had done her duty. More than ever, it was obvious
that something was wrong with Richard. She suppressed the impulse to
phone again.}{ }{-2-101 Mrs. Hanshaw did not go to New York that day.
She remained home in a }{-1-61 mixture of anxiety and an irrational
anger, the latter directed against the }{-2-111 impudent Miss Robbins.}{
}{-1-61 Some fifteen minutes before school's end, her anxiety drove her
to the }{-1-71 Door. Last year she had had it equipped with an automatic
device which }{0-21 activated it to the school's co-ordinates at five of
three and kept it so, }{-1-91 barring manual adjustment, until Richard
arrived.}{ }{-1-91 Her eyes were fixed on the Door's dismal gray (why
couldn't an inactive }{-1-61 force-field be any other color, something
more lively and cheerful?) and }{-1-81 waited. Her hands felt cold as
she squeezed them together.}{ }{-1-81 The Door turned black at the
precise second but nothing happened. The minutes passed and Richard was
late. Then quite late. Then very late.}{ }{-2-101 It was a quarter of
four and she was distracted. Normally, she would have }{0-41 phoned the
school, but she couldn't, she couldn't. Not after that teacher }{-2-111
had deliberately cast doubts on Richard's mental well-being. How could
she?}{ }{-2-101 Mrs. Hanshaw moved about restlessly, lighting a
cigarette with fumbling }{-1-81 fingers, then smudging it out. Could it
be something quite normal? Could }{-2-101 Richard be staying after
school for some reason? Surely he would have told her in advance. A
gleam of light struck her; he knew she was planning to go }{-1-71 to New
York and might not be back till late in the evening}{ }{-1-91 No, he
would surely have told her. Why fool herself?}{ }{-1-81 Her pride was
breaking. She would have to call the school, or even (she}{ }{193 closed
her eyes and teardrops squeezed through between the lashes) the
}{-1-9193 police.}{ }{193 And when she opened her eyes, Richard stood
before her, eyes on the }{0-2193 ground and his whole bearing that of
someone waiting for a blow to fall.}{ }{0-1193 "Hello, Mom."}{ }{0-2193
Mrs. Hanshaw's anxiety transmuted itself instantly (in a manner known
}{0-1193 only to mothers) into anger. "Where have you been, Richard?"}{
}{0-1193 And then, before she could go further into the refrain
concerning care-}{0-3193 less, unthinking sons and broken-hearted
mothers, she took note of his ap-}{ 0-1193 pearance in greater detail,
and gasped in utter horror.}{ }{0-1193 She said, "You've been in the
open."}{ }{0-3193 Her son looked down at his dusty shoes (minus
flexies), at the dirt marks }{0-1193 that streaked his lower arms and at
the small, but definite tear in his shirt. }{193 He said, "Gosh, Mom, I
just thought I'd" and he faded out.}{ }{0-2193 She said, "Was there
anything wrong with the school Door?"}{ }{193 "No, Mom."}{ }{0-4193 "Do
you realize I've been worried sick about you?" She waited vainly for
}{0-3193 an answer. "Well, I'll talk to you afterward, young man. First,
you're taking }{ 0-1193 a bath, and every stitch of your clothing is
being thrown out. Mekkano!"}{ }{193 But the mekkano had already reacted
properly to the phrase "taking a }{0-1193 bath" and was off to the
bathroom in its silent glide.}{ }{0-1193 "You take your shoes off right
here," said Mrs. Hanshaw, "then march }{0-3193 after mekkano."}{ }{193
Richard did as he was told with a resignation that placed him beyond
}{0-3193 futile protest.}{ }{0-3193 Mrs. Hanshaw picked up the soiled
shoes between thumb and forefinger and dropped them down the disposal
chute which hummed in faint dismay }{0-4193 at the unexpected load. She
dusted her hands carefully on a tissue which she }{0-1193 allowed to
float down the chute after the shoes.}{ }{0-3193 She did not join
Richard at dinner but let him eat in the worse-than-lack-}{0-2193
of-company of the mekkano. This, she thought, would be an active sign of
}{ 0-4193 her displeasure and would do more than any amount of scolding
or punish-}{0-2193 ment to make him realize that he had done wrong.
Richard, she frequently }{0-4193 told herself, was a sensitive boy.}{
}{193 But she went up to see him at bedtime.}{ }{0-1193 She smiled at
him and spoke softly. She thought that would be the best }{0-3193 way.
After all, he had been punished already.}{ }{0-2193 She said, "What
happened today, Dickie-boy?" She had called him that when he was a baby
and just the sound of the name softened her nearly to }{-1-8193 tears.}{
}{193 But he only looked away and his voice was stubborn and cold. "I
just don't like to go through those dam Doors, Mom."}{ }{0-2193 "But why
ever not?"}{ }{-2-101 He shuffled his hands over the filmy sheet (fresh,
clean, antiseptic and, of }{-1-71 course, disposable after each use) and
said, "I just don't like them."}{ }{-1-81 "But then how do you expect to
go to school, Dickie?"}{ }{-1-71 "I'll get up early," he mumbled.}{
}{-1-81 "But there's nothing wrong with Doors."}{ }{-1-61 "Don't like
'em." He never once looked up at her.}{ }{-1-81 She said, despairingly,
"Oh, well, you have a good sleep and tomorrow morning you'll feel much
better."}{ }{-2-101 She kissed him and left the room, automatically
passing her hand through }{-1-81 the photo-cell beam and in that manner
dimming the room-lights.}{ }{-1-81 But she had trouble sleeping herself
that night. Why should Dickie dis-like Doors so suddenly? They had never
bothered him before. To be sure, }{0-21 the Door had broken down in the
morning but that should make him }{-1-81 appreciate them all the more.}{
}{-2-121 Dickie was behaving so unreasonably.}{ }{-2-111 Unreasonably?
That reminded her of Miss Robbins and her diagnosis and }{-1-71 Mrs.
Hanshaw's soft jaw set in the darkness and privacy of her bedroom.
}{-1-51 Nonsense! The boy was upset and a night's sleep was all the
therapy he }{-3-151 needed.}{ }{-1-91 But the next morning when she
arose, her son was not in the house. The mekkano could not speak but it
could answer questions with gestures of its }{-1-51 appenda ges
equivalent to a yes or no, and it did not take Mrs. Hanshaw }{-1-81 more
than half a minute to ascertain that the boy had arisen thirty minutes
earlier than usual, skimped his shower, and darted out of the house.}{
}{-1-81 But not by way of the Door.}{ }{-1-71 Out the other waythrough
the door. Small "d."}{ }{-2-101 Mrs. Hanshaw's visiphone signaled
genteelly at 3:10 }{-2-101 p.m. }{-2-101 that day. Mrs. }{-1-91 Hanshaw
guessed the caller and having activated the receiver, saw that she
}{0-41 had guessed correctly. A quick glance in the mirror to see that
she was }{-1-51 properly calm after a day of abstracted concern and
worry and then she }{-2-101 keyed in her own transmission.}{ }{-2-111
"Yes, Miss Robbins," she said coldly.}{ }{-2-101 Richard's teacher was a
bit breathless. She said, "Mrs. Hanshaw, Richard }{-1-51 has
deliberately left through the fire door although I told him to use the
}{-1-81 regular Door. I do not know where he went." Mrs. Hanshaw said,
carefully, "He left to come home." }{-2-101 Miss Robbins looked
dismayed. "Do you approve of this?" }{-1-71 Pale-faced, Mrs. Hanshaw set
about putting the teacher in her place. "I }{-1-81 don't think it is up
to you to criticize. If my son does not choose to use the }{-1-71 Door,
it is his affair and mine. I don't think there is any school ruling that
}{-1-81 would force him to use the Door, is there?" Her bearing quite
plainly inti-}{-1-61 mated that if there were she w ould see to it that
it was changed.}{ }{-1-91 Miss Robbins flushed and had time for one
quick remark before contact }{-1-81 was broken. She said, "I'd have him
probed. I really would."}{ }{-1-71 Mrs. Hanshaw remained standing before
the quartzinium plate, staring }{-1-91 blindly at its blank face. Her
sense of family placed her for a few moments quite firmly on Richard's
side. Why }{ -1-91 did }{-1-91 he have to use the Door if he chose
}{-1-61 not to? And then she settled down to wait and pride battled the
gnawing }{-1-81 anxiety that something after all was wrong with
Richard.}{ }{-2-101 He came home with a look of defiance on his face,
but his mother, with a }{-1-81 strenuous effort at self-control, met him
as though nothing were out of the }{-3-151 ordinary.}{ }{-1-71 For
weeks, she followed that policy. It's nothing, she told herself. It's a
}{-1-81 vagary. He'll grow out of it.}{ }{-1-81 It grew into an almost
normal state of affairs. Then, too, every once in a }{-1-71 while,
perhaps three days in a row, she would come down to breakfast to find
Richard waiting sullenly at the Door, then using it when school time
}{-1-81 came. She always refrained from commenting on the matter.}{
}{0-41 Always, when he did that, and especially when he followed it up
by }{-1-81 arriving home via the Door, her heart grew warm and she
thought, "Well, }{-1-71 it's over." But always with the passing of one
day, two or three, he would }{-1-61 return like an addict to his drug
and drift silently out by the doorsmall }{-2-111 "d"before she woke.}{
}{-1-91 And each time she thought despairingly of psychiatrists and
probes, and }{-1-61 each time the vision of Miss Robbins' low-bred
satisfaction at (possibly) }{-2-101 learning of it, sto pped her,
although she was scarcely aware that that was the true motive.}{ }{-1-81
Meanwhile, she lived with it and made the best of it. The mekkano was
}{-2-101 instructed to wait at the doorsmall "d"with a Tergo kit and a
change of clothing. Richard washed and changed wi thout resistance. His
underthings, socks and flexies were disposable in any case, and Mrs.
Hanshaw bore un-}{-1-81 complainingly the expense of daily disposal of
shirts. Trousers she finally }{-2-121 allowed to go a week before
disposal on condition of rigorous nightly cleans-}{-3-171 ing.}{ }{-1-51
One day she suggested that Richard accompany her on a trip to New }{0-31
York. It was more a vague desire to keep him in sight than part of any
}{-1-71 purposeful plan. He did not object. He was even happy. He
stepped right }{0-41 through the Door, unconcerned. He didn't hesitate.
He even lacked the }{-1-61 look of resentment he wore on those mornings
he used the Door to go to }{-3-171 school.}{ }{-1-81 Mrs. Hanshaw
rejoiced. This could be a way of weaning him back into }{-1-61 Door
usage, and she racked her ingenuity for excuses to make trips with
}{0-41 Richa rd. She even raised her power bill to quite unheard-of
heights by }{-1-81 suggesting, and going through with, a trip to Canton
for the day in order to }{-2-101 witness a Chinese festival.}{ }{-2-101
That was on a Sunday, and the next morning Richard marched directly to}{
}{0-3190 the hole in the wall he always used. Mrs. Hanshaw, having
wakened particu-}{190 larly early, witnessed that. For once, badgered
past endurance, she called after him plaintively, "Why not the Door,
Dickie?"}{ }{190 He said, briefly, "It's all right for Canton," and
stepped out of the house.}{ }{190 So that plan ended in failure. And
then, one day, Richard came home soaking wet. The mekkano hovered above
him uncertainly and Mrs. Han-shaw, just returned from a four-hour visit
with her sister in Iowa, cried, }{ 0-1190 "Richard Hanshaw!"}{ }{190 He
said, hang-dog fashion, "It started raining. All of a sudden, it started
}{0-3190 raining."}{ }{190 For a moment, the word didn't register with
her. Her own school days and her studies of geography were twenty years
in the past. And then she }{0-2190 remembered and caught the vision of
water pouri ng recklessly and endlessly }{190 down from the skya mad
cascade of water with no tap to turn off, no button to push, no contact
to break.}{ }{190 She said, "And you stayed out in it?"}{ }{190 He said,
"Well, gee, Mom, I came home fast as I could. I didn't know it was going
to rain."}{ }{190 Mrs. Hanshaw had nothing to say. She was appalled and
the sensation filled her too full for words to find a place.}{ }{190 Two
days later, Richard found himself with a running nose, and a dry,
scratchy throat. Mrs. Hanshaw had to admit that the vims of disease had
}{0-2190 found a lodging in her house, as though it were a miserable
hovel of the Iron }{-3-15190 Age.}{ }{190 It was over that that her
stubbornness and pride broke and she admitted to herself that, after
all, Richard had to have psychiatric help.}{ }{0-3190 Mrs. Hanshaw chose
a psychiatrist with care. Her first impulse was to find }{190 one at a
distance. For a whik, she considered stepping directly into the San
Francisco Medical Center and choosing one at random.}{ }{190 And then it
occurred to her that by doing that she would become merely }{0-1190 an
anonymous consultant. She would have no way of obtaining any greater
}{0-2190 consideration for herself than would be forthcoming to any
public-Door user }{190 of the city slums. Now if she remained in her own
community, her word }{0-2190 would carry weight}{ }{190 She consulted
the district map. It was one of that excellent series pre-pared by
Doors, Inc., and distributed free of charge to their clients. Mrs.
Hanshaw couldn't quite suppress that little thrill of civic pride as she
un-}{ 0-1190 folded the map. It wasn't a fine-print directory of Door
co-ordinates only. It was an actual map, with each house carefully
located.}{ }{190 And why not? District A-3 was a name of moment in the
world, a badge }{0-1190 of aristocracy. It was the first community on
the planet to have been estab-}{190 lished on a completely Doored basis.
The first, the largest, the wealthiest, the best-known. It needed no
factories, no stores. It didn't even need roads.}{ }{-1-81 Each house
was a little secluded castle, the Door of which had entry any-}{-1-91
where the world over where other Doors existed.}{ }{-2-111 Carefully,
she followed down the keyed listing of the five thousand fami-}{-1-91
lies of District A-3. She knew it included several psychiatrists. The
learned }{-2-111 professions were well represented in A-3.}{ }{-1-51
Doctor Hamilton Sloane was the second name she arrived at and her
}{-1-71 finger lingered upon the map. His office was scarcely two miles
from the }{-1-81 Hanshaw residence. She liked his name. The fact that he
lived in A-3 was }{-2-111 evidence of worth. And he was a neighbor,
practically a neighbor. He would }{-1-81 understand that it was a matter
of urgencyand confidential.}{ }{-1-71 Firmly, she put in a call to his
office to make an appointment.}{ }{-2-111 Doctor Hamilton Sloane was a
comparatively young man, not quite forty. }{-1-81 He was of good family
and he had indeed heard of Mrs. Hanshaw.}{ }{0-41 He listened to her
quietly and then said, "And this all began with the }{-2-111 Door
breakdown."}{ }{-1-51 "That's right, Doctor."}{ }{-1-81 "Does he show
any fear of the Doors?"}{ }{-1-71 "Of course not. What an idea!" She was
plainly startled.}{ }{-1-51 "It's possible, Mrs. Hanshaw, it's possible.
After all, when you stop to }{-1-81 think of how a Door works it is
rather a frightening thing, really. You step }{-1-91 into a Door, and
for an instant your atoms are converted into field-energies, }{-1-61
transmitted to another part of space and reconverted into matter. For
that }{-1-71 instant you're not alive."}{ }{-1-61 "I'm sure no one
thinks of such things."}{ }{-2-101 "But your son may. He witnessed the
breakdown of the Door. He may be }{0-31 saying to himself, 'What if the
Door breaks down just as I'm half-way }{0-41 through?'"}{ }{-1-61 "But
that's nonsense. He still uses the Door. He's even been to Canton
}{-1-91 with me; Canton, China. And as I told you, he uses it for school
about once or twice a week."}{ }{-2-111 "Freely? Cheerfully?"}{ }{-2-101
"Well," said Mrs. Hanshaw, reluctantly, "he does seem a bit put out by
it. }{-1-51 But really, Doctor, there isn't much use talking about it,
is there? If you }{-1-81 w ould do a quick probe, see where the trouble
was," and she finished on a }{-1-61 bright note, "why, that would be
all. I'm sure it's quite a minor thing."}{ }{-1-81 Dr. Sloane signed. He
detested the word "probe" and there was scarcely any word he heard
oftener.}{ }{0-41 "Mrs. Hanshaw," he said patiently, "there is no such
thing as a quick }{0-31 probe. Now I know the mag-strips are full of it
and it's a rage in some }{-1-71 circles, but it's much overrated."}{

}{-2-111 "Are you serious?"}{ }{0-41 "Quite. The probe is very
complicated and the theory is that it traces }{-1-91 mental circuits.
You see, the cells of the brains are interconnected in a large}{
}{0-1193 variety of ways.~ Some of those interconnected paths are more
used than }{0-2193 others. They represent habits of thought, both
conscious and unconscious. }{193 Theory has it that these paths in any
given brain can be used to diagnose }{0-3193 mental ills early and with
certainty."}{ }{0-2193 "Well, then?"}{ }{0-3193 "But subjection to the
probe is quite a fearful thing, especially to a child. It's a traumatic
experience. It takes over an hour. And even then, the results }{0-2193
mu st be sent to the Central Psychoanalytical Bureau for analysis, and
that }{193 could take weeks. And on top of all that, Mrs. Hanshaw, there
are many }{0-3193 psychiatrists who think the theory of probe-analyses
to be most uncertain."}{ }{0-2193 Mrs. Hanshaw compressed her lips. "You
mean nothing can be done."}{ }{193 Dr. Sloane smiled. "Not at all. There
were psychiatrists for centuries }{0-1193 before there were probes. I
suggest that you let me talk to the boy."}{ }{193 "Talk to him? Is that
all?"}{ }{193 "I'll come to you for background information when
necessary, but the essential thing, I think, is to talk to the boy."}{
}{0-4193 "Really, Dr. Sloane, I doubt if he'll discuss the matter with
you. He won't }{193 talk to me about it and I'm his mother."}{ }{0-2193
"That often happens," the psychiatrist assured her. "A child will
some-}{193 times talk more readily to a stranger. In any case, I cannot
take the case }{-1-5193 otherwise."}{

}{0-1193 Mrs. Hanshaw rose, not at all pleased. "When can you come,
Doctor?"}{ }{193 "What about this coming Saturday? The boy won't be in
school. Will }{-1-5193 you be busy?"}{ }{0-3193 "We will be ready."}{
}{0-4193 She made a dignified exit. Dr. Sloane accompanied her through
the small }{193 reception room to his office Door and waited while she
punched the co-}{0-1193 ordinates of her house. He watched her pass
through. She became a half-}{0-3193 woman, a quarter-woman, an isolated
elbow and foot, a nothing.}{ }{0-4193 It }{0-4193 was }{0-4193
frightening.}{ }{-1-5193 Did a Door ever break down during passage,
leaving half a body here and }{193 half there? He had never heard of
such a case, but he imagined it could }{-1-5193 happen.}{

}{0-2193 He returned to his desk and looked up the time of his next
appointment. }{0-3193 It was obvious to him that Mrs. Hanshaw was
annoyed and disappointed at }{0-2193 not having arranged for a psychic
probe treatment.}{ }{193 Why, for God's sake? Why should a thing like
the probe, an obvious }{0-4193 piece of quackery in his own opinion, get
such a hold on the general public? }{0-1193 It must be part of this
general trend toward machines. Anything man can }{0-3193 do, machines
can do better. Machines! More machines! Machines for any-}{0-2193 thing
and everything! O temporal O mores!}{ }{-1-5193 Oh, hell!}{ }{0-1193 His
resentment of the probe was beginning to bother him. Was it a fear}{
}{-1-61 of technological unemployment, a basic insecurity on his part, a
mecha-}{-1-81 nophobia, if that was the wordHe made a mental note to
discuss this with his own analyst.}{ }{-2-111 Dr. Sloane had to feel his
way. The boy wasn't a patient who had come to }{-1-91 him, more or less
anxious to talk, more or less anxious to be helped.}{ }{-2-111 Under the
circumstances it would have been best to keep his first meeting }{-2-101
with Richard short and noncommittal. It would have been sufficient
merely to establish himself as something le ss than a total stranger.
The next time he would be someone Richard had seen before. The time
after he would be an }{-1-71 acquaintance, and after that a friend of
the family.}{ }{-1-91 Unfortunately, Mrs. Hanshaw was not likely to
accept a long-drawn-out }{-2-121 process. She would go searching for a
probe and, of course, she would find it.}{ }{-1-71 And harm the boy. He
was certain of that.}{ }{0-21 It was for that reason he felt he must
sacrifice a little of the proper }{-1-91 caution and risk a small
crisis.}{ }{-1-91 An uncomfortable ten minutes had passed when he
decided he must try. }{-1-81 Mrs. Hanshaw was smiling in a rather rigid
way, eyeing him narrowly, as though she expected verbal magic from him.
Richard wriggled in his seat, }{-1-91 unresponsive to Dr. Sloane's
tentative comments, overcome with boredom }{ -1-71 and unable not to
show it.}{ }{-1-91 Dr. Sloane said, with casual suddenness, "Would you
like to take a walk }{-1-81 with me, Richard?"}{ }{-1-91 The boy's eyes
widened and he stopped wriggling. He looked directly at Dr. Sloane. "A
walk, sir?"}{ }{-1-61 "I mean, outside."}{ }{-2-111 "Do you
gooutside?"}{ }{-1-71 "Sometimes. When I feel like it."}{ }{-1-71
Richard was on his feet, holding down a squirming eagerness. "I didn't
}{-1-81 think anyone did."}{ }{-1-71 "I do. And I like company."}{
}{-1-91 The boy sat down, uncertainly. "Mom?"}{ }{-1-61 Mrs. Hanshaw had
stiffened in her seat, her compressed lips radiating }{-1-81 horror, but
she managed to say, "Why certainly, Dickie. But watch your-}{-2-131
self."}{ }{-1-81 And she managed a quick and baleful glare at Dr.
Sloane.}{ }{-1-81 In one respect, Dr. Sloane had lied. He did }{-1-81
not }{-1-81 go outside "sometimes." }{0-41 He hadn't been in the open
since early college days. True, he had been }{ -1-51 athletically
inclined (still was to some extent) but in his time the indoor }{-2-111
ultra-violet chambers, swimming pools and tennis courts had flourished.
For }{-1-61 those with the price, they were much more satisfactory than
the outdoor }{-2-111 equivalents, open to the elements as they were,
could possibly be. There was }{-1-91 no occasion to go outside.}{
}{0-4189 So there was a crawling sensation about his skin when he felt
wind touch }{0-2189 it, and he put down his flexied shoes on bare grass
with a gingerly move-}{ -1-7189 ment.}{ }{0-1189 "Hey, look at that."
Richard was quite different now, laughing, his re-}{-1-6189 serve broken
down.}{ }{189 Dr. Sloane had time only to catch a flash of blue that
ended in a tree. }{0-3189 Leaves rustled and he lost it.}{ }{189 "What
was it?"}{ }{0-1189 "A bird," said Richard. "A blue kind of bird."}{
}{0-4189 Dr. Sloane looked about him in amazement. The Hanshaw residence
was }{0-1189 on a rise of ground, and he could see for miles. The area
was only lightly }{-1-5189 wooded and between clumps of trees, grass
gleamed brightly in the sunlight.}{ }{189 Colors set in deeper green
made red and yellow patterns. They were }{-1-6189 flowers. From the
books he had viewed in the course of his lifetime and from }{0-3189 the
old video shows, he had learned enough so that all this had an eerie
sort }{-1-6189 of familiarity.}{ }{-1-5189 And yet the grass was so
trim, the flowers so patterned. Dimly, he realized }{0-1189 he had been
expecting something wilder. He said, "Who takes care of all }{ -1-6189
this?"}{ }{0-2189 Richard shrugged. "I dunno. Maybe the mekkanos do
it."}{ }{-1-7189 "Mekkanos?"}{ }{0-4189 "There's loads of them around.
Sometimes they got a sort of atomic knife }{189 they hold near the
ground. It cuts the grass. And they're always fooling }{0-1189 around
with the flowers and things. There's one of them over there."}{ }{0-4189
It was a small object, half a mile away. Its metal skin cast back
highlights }{189 as it moved slowly over the gleaming meadow, engaged in
some sort of }{0-2189 activity that Dr. Sloane could not identify.}{
}{0-2189 Dr. Sloane was astonished. Here it was a perverse sort of
estheticism, a }{0-4189 kind of conspicuous consumption}{ }{0-1189
"What's that?" he asked suddenly.}{ }{0-4189 Richard looked. He said,
"That's a house. Belongs to the Froehlichs. Co-}{0-2189 ordinates, A-3,
23, 461. That little pointy building over there is the public }{ -1-5189
Door."}{ }{0-4189 Dr. Sloane was staring at the house. Was that what it
looked like from the }{-1-5189 outside? Somehow he had imagined
something much more cubic, and taller.}{ }{0-2189 "Come along," shouted
Richard, running ahead.}{ }{0-2189 Dr. Sloane followed more sedately.
"Do you know all the houses about }{-1-6189 here?"}{ }{0-2189 "Just
about."}{ }{0-2189 "Where is A-23, 26, 475?" It was his own house, of
course.}{ }{0-2189 Richard looked about. "Let's see. Oh, sure, I know
where it isyou see }{0-1189 that water there?"}{ }{0-2189 "Water?" Dr.
Sloane made out a line of silver curving across the green.}{ }{189
"Sure. Real water. Just sort of running over rocks and things. It
keeps}{ }{0-4188 running all the time. You can get across it if you step
on the rocks. It's called }{0-2188 a river."}{ }{188 More like a creek,
thought Dr. Sloane. He had studied geography, of }{0-3188 course, but
what passed for the subject these days was really economic and }{-1-5188
cultural geography. Physical geography was almost an extinct science
except among specialists. Still, he knew what rivers and creeks were, in
a theoretical sort of way.}{ }{0-3188 Richard was still talking. "Well,
just past the river, over that hill with the }{188 big clump of trees
and down the other side a way is A-23, 26, 475. It's a }{0-1188 light
green house with a white roof."}{ }{188 "It is?" Dr. Sloane was
genuinely astonished. He hadn't known it was }{-1-8188 green.}{ }{0-3188
Some small animal disturbed the grass in its anxiety to avoid the
oncom-}{188 ing feet. Richard looked after it and shrugged. "You can't
catch them. I }{0-2188 tried."}{

}{0-1188 A butterfly flitted past, a wavering bit of yellow. Dr.
Sloane's eyes fol-}{-1-5188 lowed it.}{ }{0-2188 There was a low hum
that lay over the fields, interspersed with an occa-}{188 sional harsh,
calling sound, a rattle, a twittering, a chatter that rose, then
}{0-1188 fell. As his ear accustomed itself to listening, Dr. Sloane
heard a thousand }{0-3188 sounds, and none were man-made.}{ }{188 A
shadow fell upon the scene, advancing toward him, covering him. It
}{0-3188 was suddenly cooler and he looked upward, startled.}{ }{188
Richard said, "It's just a cloud. It'll go away in a minutelooka these
}{0-1188 flowers. They're the kind that smell."}{ }{0-4188 They were
several hundred yards from the Hanshaw residence. The cloud }{188 passed
and the sun shone once more. Dr. Sloane looked back and was }{0-2188
appalled at the distance they had covered. If they moved out of sight of
the }{0-1188 house and if Richard ran off, would he be able to find his
way back?}{ }{0-2188 He pushed the thought away impatiently and looked
out toward the line }{188 of water (nearer now) and past it to where his
own house must be. He }{0-3188 thought wonderingly: Light green?}{
}{0-1188 He said, "You must be quite an explorer."}{ }{188 Richard said,
with a shy pride, "When I go to school and come back, I }{0-1188 always
try to use a different route and see new things."}{ }{0-4188 "But you
don't go outside every morning, do you? Sometimes you use the }{0-2188
Doors, I imagine."}{ }{188 "Oh, sure."}{ }{0-4188 "Why is that,
Richard?" Somehow, Dr. Sloane felt there might be signifi-}{188 cance in
that point.}{ }{0-3188 But Richard quashed him. With his eyebrows up and
a look of astonish-ment on his face, he said, "Well, gosh, some mornings
it rains and I }{0-3188 have }{ 0-3188 to use the Door. I hate that, but
what can you do? About two-weeks ago, I got}{ }{190 caught in the rain
and I" he looked about him automatically, and his voice sank to a
whisper "caught a cold, and wasn't Mom upset, though."}{ }{0-1190 Dr.
Sloane sighed. "Shall we go back now?"}{ }{190 There was a quick
disappointment on Richard's face. "Aw, what for?"}{ }{190 "You remind me
that your mother must be waiting for us."}{ }{190 "I guess so." The boy
turned reluctantly.}{ }{0-3190 They walked slowly back. Richard was
saying, chattily, "I wrote a compo-}{190 sition at school once about how
if I could go on some ancient vehi cle" (he pronounced it with
exaggerated care) "I'd go in a stratoliner and look at stars and clouds
and things. Oh, boy, I was sure nuts."}{ }{0-1190 "You'd pick something
else now?"}{ }{190 "You bet. I'd go in an aut'm'bile, real slow. Then
I'd see everything there }{-1-6190 was."}{ }{190 Mrs. Hanshaw seemed
troubled, uncertain. "You don't think it's abnor-mal, then, Doctor?"}{
}{190 "Unusual, perhaps, but not abnormal. He likes the outside."}{
}{190 "But how can he? It's so dirty, so unpleasant."}{ }{190 "That's a
matter of individual taste. A hundred years ago our ancestors }{0-1190
were all outside most of the time. Even today, I dare say there are a
million }{190 Africans who have never seen a Door."}{ }{190 "But
Richard's always been taught to behave himself the way a decent }{0-1190
person in District A-3 is supposed to behave," said Mrs. Hanshaw,
fiercely. }{190 "Not like an African or or an ancestor."}{ }{190 "That
may be part of the trouble, Mrs. Hanshaw. He feels this urge to go
outside and yet he feels it to be wrong. He's ashamed to talk about it
to you or to his teacher. It forces him into sullen retreat and it could
eventually be }{ 0-3190 dangerous."}{ }{190 "Then how can we persuade
him to stop?"}{ }{190 Dr. Sloane said, "Don't try. Channel the activity
instead. The day your Door broke down, he was forced outside, found he
liked it, and that set a pattern. He used the trip to school and back as
an excuse to repeat that first exciting experience. Now suppose you
agree to let him out of the house for two hours on Saturdays and
Sundays. Suppose he gets it through his head }{0-2190 that after all he
can go outside without necessarily having to go anywhere in }{190 the
process. Don't you think he'll be willing to use the Door to go to
school }{0-1190 and back thereafter? And don't you think that will stop
the trouble he's now having with his teacher and probably with his
fellow-pupils?"}{ }{190 "But then will matters remain so? Must they?
Won't he ever be normal }{-1-5190 again?"}{ }{190 Dr. Sloane rose to his
feet. "Mrs. Hanshaw, he's as normal as need be right now. Right now,
he's tasting the joys of the forbidden. If you co-operate with him, show
that you don't disapprove, it w ill lose some of its attraction right
there. Then, as he grows older, he will become more aware}{ }{-2-101 of
the expectations and demands of society. He will learn to conform. After
}{-1-81 all, there is a little of the rebel in all of us, but it
generally dies down as we }{-2-111 g row old and tired. Unless, that is,
it is unreasonably suppressed and allowed }{-1-61 to build up pressure.
Don't do that. Richard will be all right."}{ }{-1-81 He walked to the
Door.}{ }{0-41 Mrs. Hanshaw said, "And you don't think a probe will be
necessary, }{-2-121 Doctor?"}{ }{-1-51 He turned and said vehemently,
"No, definitely not! There is nothing }{-1-71 about the boy that
requires it. Understand? Nothing."}{ }{-2-101 His fingers hesitated an
inch from the combination board and the expres-sion on his face grew
lowering.}{ }{-1-71 "What's the matter, Dr. Sloane?" asked Mrs.
Hanshaw.}{ }{0-21 But he didn't hear her because he was thinking of the
Door and the }{-1-91 psychic probe and all the rising, choking tide of
machinery. There is a little }{-1-61 of the rebel in all of us, he
thought.}{ }00000 {-2-111 So he said in a soft voice, as his hand fell
away from the board and his feet }{0-41 turned away from the Door, "You
know, it's such a beautiful day that I }{-1-71 think I'll walk."}{ }}
