{10{} 411033020 Isaac Asimov's Robot City 6 - PerihelionISAAC
ASIMOV'92SROBOT CITYBOOK 6: PERIHELIONWILLIAM F. WUCopyright 'a9
1988Special thanks for help in writing this novel are due to David M.
Harris, Rob Chilson, my wife Diana Gallagher Wu, and of course Isaac
Asimov for supporting the Robot City project.THIS NOVEL IS DEDICATED
TOCHELSEA, WITH LOVEROBOTS IN COMBINATIONISAAC ASIMOVI have been
inventing stories about robots now for very nearly half a century. In
that time, I have rung almost every conceivable change upon the
theme.Mind you, it was not my intention to compose an encyclopedia of
robot nuances; it was not even my intention to write about them for half
a century. It just happened that I survived that long and maintained my
interest in the concept. And it also just happened that in attempting to
think of new story ideas involving robots, I ended up thinking about
nearly everything.For instance, in this sixth volume of the Robot City
series, there are the '93chemfets,'94 which have been introduced into
the hero '91s body in order to replicate and, eventually, give him
direct psycho-electronic control over the core computer, and hence all
the robots of Robot City.Well, in my book Foundation'92s Edge
(Doubleday, 1982), my hero, Golan Trevize, before taking off in a
spaceship, makes contact with an advanced computer by placing his hands
on an indicated place on the desk before him.'93And as he and the
computer held hands, their thinking merged...'93...he saw the room with
complete clarity'97not just in the direction in which he was looking,
but all around and above and below.'93He saw every room in the
spaceship, and he saw outside as well. The sun had risen...but he could
look at it directly without being dazzled...'93He felt the gentle wind
and its temperature, and the sounds of the world about him. He detected
the planet'92s magnetic field and the tiny electrical charges on the
wall of the ship.'93He became aware of the controls of the ship...He
knew...that if he wanted to lift the ship, or turn it, or accelerate, or
make use of any of its abilities, the process was the same as that of
performing the analogous process to his body. He had but to use his
will.'94That was as close as I could come to picturing the result of a
mind-computer interface, and now, in connection with this new book, I
can'92t help thinking of it further.I suppose that the first time human
beings learned how to form an interface between the human mind and
another sort of intelligence was when they tamed the horse and learned
how to use it as a form of transportation. This reached its highest
point when human beings rode horses directly, and when a pull at a rein,
the touch of a spur, a squeeze of the knees, or just a cry, could make
the horse react in accordance with the human will.It is no wonder that
primitive Greeks seeing horsemen invade the comparatively broad
Thessalian plains (the part of Greece most suitable to horsemanship)
thought they were seeing a single animal with a human torso and a
horse'92s body. Thus was invented the centaur.Again, there are '93trick
drivers.'94 There are expert '93stunt men'94 who can make an automobile
do marvelous things. One might expect that a New Guinea native who had
never seen or heard of an automobile before might believe that such
stunts were being carried through by a strange and monstrous living
organism that had, as part of its structure, a portion with a human
appearance within its stomach.But a person plus a horse is but an
imperfect fusion of intelligence, and a person plus an automobile is but
an extension of human muscles by mechanical linkages. A horse can easily
disobey signals, or even run away in uncontrollable panic. And an
automobile can break down or skid at an inconvenient moment.The fusion
of human and computer, however, ought to be a much closer approach to
the ideal. It may be an extension of the mind itself as I tried to make
plain in Foundation'92s Edge. a multiplication and intensification of
sense-perception, an incredible extension of the will.Under such
circumstances, might not the fusion represent, in a very real sense, a
single organism, a kind of cybernetic '93centaur?'94 And once such a
union is established, would the human fraction wish to break it? Would
he not feel such a break to be an unbearable loss and be unable to live
with the impoverishment of mind and will he would then have to face? In
my novel, Golan Trevize could break away from the computer at will and
suffered no ill effects as a result, but perhaps that is not
realistic.Another issue that appears now and then in the Robot City
series concerns the interaction of robot and robot.This has not played a
part in most of my stories, simply because I generally had a single
robot character of importance in any given story and I dealt entirely
with the matter of the interaction between that single robot and various
human beings.Consider robots in combination.The First Law states that a
robot cannot injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human
being to come to harm.But suppose two robots are involved, and that one
of them, through inadvertence, lack of knowledge, or special
circumstances, is engaged in a course of action (quite innocently) that
will clearly injure a human being'97and suppose the second robot, with
greater knowledge or insight, is aware of this. Would he not be required
by the First Law to stop the first robot from committing the injury? If
there were no other way, would he not be required by the First Law to
destroy the first robot without hesitation or regret?Thus, in my book
Robots and Empire (Doubleday, 1985), a robot is introduced to whom human
beings have been defined as those speaking with a certain accent. The
heroine of the book does not speak with that accent and therefore the
robot feels free to kill her. That robot is promptly destroyed by a
second robot.The situation is similar for the Second Law, in which
robots are forced to obey orders given them by human beings provided
those orders do not violate the First Law.If, of two robots, one through
inadvertence or lack of understanding does not obey an order, the second
must either carry through the order itself, or force the first to do
so.Thus, in an intense scene in Robots and Empire, the villainess gives
one robot a direct order. The robot hesitates because the order may
cause harm to the heroine. For a while, then, there is a confrontation
in which the villainess reinforces her own order while a second robot
tries to reason the first robot into a greater realization of the harm
that will be done to the heroine. Here we have a case where one robot
urges another to obey the Second Law in a truer manner, and to withstand
a human being in so doing.It is the Third Law, however, that brings up
the knottiest problem where robots in combination are concerned.The
Third Law states that a robot must protect its own existence, where that
is consistent with the First and Second Laws.But what if two robots are
concerned? Is each merely concerned with its own existence, as a literal
reading of the Third Law would make it seem? Or would each robot feel
the need for helping the other maintain its own existence?As I said,
this problem never arose with me as long as I dealt with only one robot
per story. (Sometimes there were other robots but they were distinctly
subsidiary characters'97merely spear-carriers, so to speak.)However,
first in The Robots of Dawn (Doubleday, 1983), and then in its sequel
Robots and Empire, I had two robots of equal importance. One of these
was R. Daneel Olivaw, a humaniform robot (who could not easily be told
from a human being) who had earlier appeared in The Caves of Steel
(Doubleday, 1954), and in its sequel, The Naked Sun (Doubleday, 1957).
The other was R. Giskard Reventlov, who had a more orthodox metallic
appearance. Both robots were advanced to the point where their minds
were of human complexity.It was these two robots who were engaged in the
struggle with the villainess, the Lady Vasilia. It was Giskard who (such
were the exigencies of the plot) was being ordered by Vasilia to leave
the service of Gladia (the heroine) and enter her own. And it was Daneel
who tenaciously argued the point that Giskard ought to remain with
Gladia. Giskard has the ability to exert a limited mental control over
human beings, and Daneel points out that Vasilia ought to be controlled
for Gladia'92s safety. He even argues the good of humanity in the
abstract ('93the Zeroth Law'94) in favor of such an action.Daneel'92s
arguments weaken the effect of Vasilia'92s orders, but not sufficiently.
Giskard is made to hesitate, but cannot be forced to take
action.Vasilia, however, decides that Daneel is too dangerous; if he
continues to argue, he might force Giskard his way. She therefore orders
her own robots to inactivate Daneel and further orders Daneel not to
resist. Daneel must obey the order and Vasilia'92s robots advance to the
task.It is then that Giskard acts. Her four robots are inactivated and
Vasilia herself crumples into a forgetful sleep. Later Daneel asks
Giskard to explain what happened.Giskard says, '93When she ordered the
robots to dismantle you, friend Daneel, and showed a clear emotion of
pleasure at the prospect, your need, added to what the concept of the
Zeroth Law had already done, superseded the Second Law and rivaled the
First Law. It was the combination of the Zeroth Law, psychohistory, my
loyalty to Lady Gladia, and your need that dictated my action.'94Daneel
now argues that his own need (he being merely a robot) ought not to have
influenced Giskard at all. Giskard obviously agrees, yet he says:'93It
is a strange thing, friend Daneel. I do not know how it came about...At
the moment when the robots advanced toward you and Lady Vasilia
expressed her savage pleasure, my positronic pathway pattern re-formed
in an anomalous fashion. For a moment, I thought of you'97as a human
being'97and I reacted accordingly.'94Daneel said, '93That was
wrong.'94Giskard said, '93I know that. And yet'97and yet, if it were to
happen again, I believe the same anomalous change would take place
again.'94And Daneel cannot help but feel that if the situation were
reversed, he, too, would act in the same way.In other words, the robots
had reached a stage of complexity where they had begun to lose the
distinction between robots and human beings, where they could see each
other as '93friends,'94 and have the urge to save each other'92s
existence.There seems to be another step to take'97that of robots
realizing a kind of solidarity that supersedes all the Laws of Robotics.
I speculated about that in my short story '93Robot Dreams,'94 which was
written for my recent book, Robot Dreams (Berkley/ Ace, 1986).In it
there was the case of a robot that dreamed of the robots as an enslaved
group of beings whom it was his own mission to liberate. It was only a
dream and there was no indication in the story that he would be able to
liberate himself from the Three Laws to the point of being able to lead
a robot rebellion (or that robots, generally, could liberate themselves
to the point of following him).Nevertheless, the mere concept is
dangerous and the robot-dreamer is instantly inactivated.William F.
Wu'92s robots have no such radical ideas, but they have formed a
community that is concerned with the welfare of its members. It is
pleasant to have him take up such matters and apply his own imagination
to the elaboration and resolution of the problems that are
raised.CHAPTER lTHE COMPASS TOWERDerec stood on the high, flat top of
the Compass Tower, looking down from the great pyramid at the endless
geometric wonders of Robot City beneath its blue and brilliant sky.
Ariel leaned against him, still clutching his arm in both hands.
Mandelbrot the robot and Wolruf, the little caninoid sentient alien,
waited behind them.'93It'92s changed so much,'94 Derec said quietly.
They had just teleported back to the planet by using their double Key to
Perihelion. Mandelbrot had carried them all here. '93Keep the Key.
It'92ll be safest with you.'94'93Yes, Derec,'94 said Mandelbrot.Derec
turned around to gaze in the other direction. The sight was the same:
the lights and shapes of Robot City, stretching to a skyline barely
limned by the reflected sunlight against the blue horizon. He could not
escape it in any direction. His destiny seemed to be here.'93What'92s
changed?'94 Ariel asked. Her voice was meek. She had not recovered from
her ordeal on Earth. A critical illness had reached fullness there,
destroying her memories and her entire identity with them. They had not
been there by choice, but fortunately he had been able to place a new
matrix of chemical memories into her mind. They were to grow on the
residue of her old memory, but they were still developing. She had not
had time to get used to them, to integrate them, to understand who she
was.Derec squinted into the warm breeze that blew up the front face of
the pyramid. It tossed his sandy hair. Once brush cut, it had grown out
to a golden shag. '93They'92ve done it. The robots have built the city
out in all directions. It could cover the entire planet by now.'94'93So
it didn'92t before.'94 She nodded, as if to herself, looking all around
as he was.'93No. Still, we aren'92t exactly strangers here. We know how
to get along. And if we'92re lucky, we can get this trip over with and
leave again before long.'94 Derec turned to Mandelbrot. '93We have to
find some shelter before we'92re noticed. Can you still use your comlink
to reach the city computer?'94'93I will try.'94 Mandelbrot hesitated a
few seconds, quite a long time for a robot. '93Yes. The city computer
has changed the frequency it uses, but I have identified the new one by
the simple expedient of starting with the original and sending a variety
of signals that run up and down the entire range of'97.'94'93Fine,
excellent, thank you.'94 Derec grinned at his enthusiasm, gesturing with
his hands palm forward. '93Believe me, I trust your competence. My next
question is this: When Ariel and I first came to Robot City, I found an
office in this pyramid, down below. It had been recently occupied. I
think we can find Dr. Avery there, but we have to be careful. Can you
find out from the city computer if the office is still in use?'94'93I
will try.'94 Mandelbrot then shook his head. '93The computer will not
reveal any information about the office. It will not even confirm that
the office still exists.'94'93All right. '93 Derec sighed.'93What if
it'92s gone?'94 Ariel asked.'93I'92d be very surprised,'94 said Derec.
'93Avery just didn'92t want his private office on file anywhere. We'92ll
have to take our chances and just go right in if we can. '93Ariel held
her hair out of her face. '93Just go in? How?'94'93The ceiling of the
office had a trapdoor that opened right up into this platform we'92re
on.'94 He got down on his hands and knees. '93Come on, let'92s find
it.'94'93Derec.'94 Ariel'92s voice was a little stronger, showing some
of her old spirit. '93You'92ve been growing weaker because of
those...things Dr. Avery forced into your body. Just be careful, will
you?'94'93Can you find it?'94 he demanded irritably. '93You'92re not in
the best condition of your life, either.'94'93Well, I'92m not sick
anymore!'94 She folded her arms. '93I'92m well now, at least
physically.'94 She watched him for a moment. Then, as if to prove the
point, she knelt down and started feeling around the surface of the
platform herself.'93You don'92t even remember being here before, do
you?'94 Derec asked accusingly. The tension was making him
irritable.'93Do you?'94'93Yes!'94'93Well...you haven'92t known who you
are for the entire time I'92ve known you. You'92ve had amnesia
since....'94 She shook her head, shaking off the thought. '93I may not
have adjusted to everything, but at least I have something.'94 Then she
hesitated, searching his face. '93I didn'92t mean to say that. Not out
loud, anyway. Did I get that right? Or did I remember wrong?'94Derec
shook his head shortly and turned away. '93That'92s right.'94 She had
even phrased it much the same way on earlier occasions. He shifted
around on his knees, feeling for an irregularity in the smooth surface.
'93Mandelbrot, can you see anything?'94'93Here,'94 said Mandelbrot,
walking to a far corner of the platform. '93My vision has identified a
small square outline that likely represents the opening.'94'93Good.'94
Derec walked over to Mandelbrot and knelt at the robot'92s feet. He slid
his hands along the sides of a rectangular hairline break in the
platform floor until he felt a small depression in the surface, no
larger than a thumbhold. He braced himself and started to slide it to
one side.'93Allow me,'94 said Mandelbrot.'93No, I got it'97'94 Derec
stopped, as the robot gently grasped his forearm and pulled it away. He
turned to look up. '93Mandelbrot, what are you doing?'94'93How much have
the chemfets in your body weakened you?'94 Mandelbrot asked.'93Not that
much! Now let'92s quit talking and get down there. Avery put '91em in me
and he'92s the only one who can get '91em out. Come on!'94 Derec pulled
away from the robot again.'93Derec?'94 Ariel said
tentatively.'93Mandelbrot,'94 said Derec, '93carry Wolruf and come down
last. Help Ariel over the'97'94'93I cannot. I must open it and go
first.'94'93What?'94'93The First Law of Robotics,'94 said Mandelbrot
mildly. '93I can'92t harm a human or let one come to harm'97'94'93I
know!'94 Derec shouted angrily. '93Don'92t you lecture me on the Laws. I
put you together, remember? I know those Laws inside out, outside in,
upside down'97'94'93I said it for Ariel'92s benefit,'94 said Mandelbrot.
'93Perhaps her memory of the Laws is not clear.'94'93I remember that
one.'94 Ariel looked embarrassed by the confrontation. '93Uh'97is the
Second Law the one that says a robot must obey orders from a
human?'94'93Yes, unless the orders conflict with the First Law.'94
Mandelbrot nodded.'93Then the Third Law must be the one that says a
robot can'92t let itself come to harm or harm itself. '93'93As long as
this doesn'92t conflict with the First or Second Laws,'94 Mandelbrot
finished. '93Correct.'94Ariel smiled faintly.'93Let'92s get going,'94
said Derec impatiently. He reached for the thumbhold again, though he
did not expect Mandelbrot to let him open the door now, either.'93I will
determine this situation,'94 said Mandelbrot firmly. '93With all due
respect, the Laws require it.'94'93How do you figure that?'94 Derec
demanded.'93Your motor control of your own body is gradually failing
because of the chemfets in your body. Ariel is disoriented because of
her memory transfer, and Wolruf'92s body is unsuited to climbing down at
this steep angle. We are about to enter the office and possible
temporary residence of your nemesis. The likelihood of harm to you is
high; therefore, I shall go first.'94Derec glared at him, unable to
argue with his robotic logic.Wolruf looked up at him, cocking her
doglike face to one side. '93Arr '91u going to carry me down?'94'93I
will enter alone, first,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93Derec'92s knowledge of
Robot City makes him the best able to handle unexpected developments, so
he will follow me if the room offers no danger. I will carry you down if
we all go.'94Wolruf nodded assent.Derec watched Mandelbrot in the faint
light. The robot hesitated just a moment, probably looking with infrared
sensors and listening for signs of habitation or danger within. Then he
bent down and slid the trapdoor open slightly. After another pause, he
opened the trap fully and climbed down a metal ladder inside the
door.Derec waited, hardly daring to breathe. Avery could easily have a
trap waiting for them. Wolruf moved to his side. Ariel stood quietly,
but seemed relaxed, as though she did not understand the gravity of the
situation.After what seemed like a long time, a light came on in the
room, throwing a cone of light upward. Mandelbrot called up softly.
'93It is here and unoccupied, apparently safe for everyone.'94Derec let
out a breath of relief and took Ariel'92s arm. '93You go next. Never
mind what he said about me handling the unexpected; he can protect you
better if anything happens. And he'92ll help you if you have trouble
with the ladder.'94'93All right.'94 Ariel started climbing down
carefully.Wolruf came to the edge of the opening and peeked down
cautiously, being careful not to get in the way.Derec took the time to
move with similar caution to the edge of the Compass Tower. So far, he
could see no changes down below that indicated an alert.Wolruf went
next. Then Derec started down, hoping his hands and feet would obey him.
He descended slowly into the room, holding the ladder tightly. When he
was fully inside, he slid the door shut over his head.The ladder was
firm and not difficult to negotiate. Just before he reached the floor,
however, the muscles of his right leg failed to respond. His foot
slipped off the bottom rung and he stumbled back into the arms of
Mandelbrot.Derec pulled himself away, glaring at the others, who were
all watching him. '93I just slipped, all right?'94None of them
answered.'93Come on, come on. Let'92s find out what we can.'94 Derec
moved past Mandelbrot to pace around the office, looking around.At first
glance, it was just as he remembered. The only other time he had been
here, Ariel had remained inside only a moment or two, so she would have
few memories of the interior even at her best. The other two had never
been here at all.The walls and the ceiling were entirely viewscreens,
displaying a panoramic view of Robot City at night on all sides. It was
nearly identical to the view Derec had seen from the platform just above
the room. The buildings of Robot City sparkled in all directions as far
as he could see. In the ceiling, they could see the blue sky still above
them.The office was furnished with real furniture, all brought from
another planet; easy chairs, couch-bed, and an iron-alloy desk, instead
of the simple utilitarian furniture made in Robot City. A blotter with
paper and two zero-g ink pens were on the desk. As before, a small,
airtight shelf full of tapes was intact. They were separated by subject
and then by planet, as he recalled, representing all fifty-five Spacer
worlds. If anyone had used them, they had all been replaced in order.
Nothing seemed changed since his last visit until he turned and saw the
plant.Before, an unfamiliar plant had been flourishing under a growth
light. The light was still in place, but the plant beneath it lay limp
and dried in its pot. Its stalks were lavender, but he had no idea if
that was a sign of recent dessication or its normal color in death. He
crumpled a dead leaf thoughtfully in one hand.'93Someone just let it
die,'94 said Ariel, joining him.'93I don'92t think anyone'92s been
here,'94 said Derec. '93Mandelbrot, Wolruf '97does anyone see any sign
of recent habitation here?'94Ariel looked around the room, and then down
into a small waste basket. '93This is empty.'94'93Someone has been here
since I was here last, then,'94 said Derec. '93But that was a long time
ago.'94 He turned back to the desk with a sudden memory. Before, a holo
cube with a picture of a mother and baby had been on it. The cube was
gone.'93Maybe rrobot emptied mash,'94 said Wolruf.'93No.'94 Derec shook
his head. '93The first time I was here, Ariel and I were led here from
the meeting room of the Supervisors. We had entered the Compass Tower
from the ground below. But we came the last part of the trip alone.
Robots aren'92t even allowed near this office. I doubt that they have
any idea what this room is. Entry would obviously be
forbidden.'94'93Then except for Dr. Avery himself,'94 said Ariel,
'93this is an ideal hiding place.'94'93If we can find a source of food
for you three,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93Also, efforts to locate Dr. Avery
will involve inherent risk.'94'93Let me check something.'94 Derec moved
to the desk and opened the big well drawer on the right. An active
computer terminal was still housed within it. '93Ah! This terminal has
no blocks of any kind. It'92s where I first learned the causes behind
the shapechanging mode of the city.'94 He sat down at the desk and
entered the question, '93Does this office have any sensors reporting to
the outside?'94'93NEGATIVE.'94'93Order: Do not leave any record of
activity on this terminal in the city computer.'94'93AFFIRMED. '93'93Is
there a source of human food available in this
room?'94'93AFFIRMATIVE.'94'93Where is it?'94'93THE CONTROL PANEL SLIDES
OUT FROM THE UNDERSIDE OF THE DESK SURFACE WHERE IT OVERHANGS THIS
DRAWER.'94'93Is there a Personal facility?'94'93YES.'94'93Where is
it?'94'93THE DOOR IS SET INTO THE VIEWSCREEN BEHIND THE LADDER. IT IS
GOVERNED BY THE DESK CONTROL PANEL ALSO.'94Derec felt under the
overhanging edge of the desk and slid out a wafer-thin panel with raised
studs. He pushed the one marked '93Mealtime'94 and turned around at a
faint hum from the wall. Near the ladder, a rectangular panel had moved
out of the view screen on the wall to reveal the receptacle of a small
chemical processor. On the front of the drawer, the panel still showed
its share of the outside view of Robot City.He let out a long breath,
and grinned at Ariel. '93If it works, this buys us some time. If the
tank has no raw nutrients, it can'92t help us at all. I'92ll try
it.'94'93No, let me.'94 Ariel moved to the control panel quickly. '93I
can test my memory with stuff like this. Let'92s see....'94 She punched
a sequence of keys, paused to think, and hit another series.'93Okay,'94
said Derec. '93What'92s it going to be?'94'93I'92m not telling. I want
to see if you can recognize it.'94 She smiled impishly, but with a bit
of worry, too.Derec punched another button on the control panel, and
watched a narrow door slide open in the viewscreen, next to the chemical
processor. It was a very small Personal, as clean and tidy as the rest
of the office. He closed the door again.A few moments later, a small
container slid into the food receptacle. Derec inhaled the aroma. '93Ha!
Magellanic frettage again? Not bad.'94 He touched the container
carefully. '93And hot, too. Smells good.'94 He looked at her over his
shoulder. '93Good job.'94Ariel smiled, wiping perspiration off her
forehead with the back of one hand'93'91Ungrry, too, please,'94 said
Wolruf politely. '93Of course. Coming up next,'94 said Ariel.Derec was
starting to lift the dish out of the receptacle when he saw Ariel blink
quickly, repeatedly, and stagger backward. She fell, and Mandelbrot
moved behind her just in time to catch her and lift her gently from the
floor. He turned and laid her carefully on the couch.CHAPTER 2MEMORIES
AND CHEMFETSDerec moved quickly to her side and knelt down. '93Ariel?'94
he said softly.She was breathing in quick, shallow breaths and
perspiring freely. Her eyes were closed.'93Mandelbrot?'94 Derec said
quietly. '93Have you got any idea what'92s wrong with her?'94'93No,
Derec. My human medical knowledge is very limited.'94'93Maybe iss jusst
tirred,'94 Wolruf said softly. '93Hass been verry sick. Needs
resst.'94'93I hope so,'94 said Derec. He felt a deep sense of panic. The
ordeal she had undergone on Earth had been extremely draining, and their
landing back here must have caused her more stress than he had realized.
'93Up till now, she was acting almost normal.'94Wolruf came to stand
next to Derec. She looked at Ariel'92s face. '93Suggesst '91u brring
food.'94'93Mandelbrot,'94 said Derec.The robot brought over the
container of Megallanic frettage and handed it to Derec. Eating utensils
were attached to the side of the container. He simply held it, letting
the aroma rise into the air near her.Nothing happened.'93Maybe this
isn'92t what she needs. She isn'92t responding at all.'94 He glanced at
the others questioningly.'93Water?'94 Wolruf suggested.'93Must find the
stranger,'94 Ariel muttered. Her eyes were still closed, but she tossed
restlessly.'93What?'94 Derec asked gently. '93What stranger?'94'93Draw
him to us. aotta be hungry by now.'94 She squirmed, the sweat on her
face shining in the light of the room. '93Have to make it better. Have
to make him like it. Has to smell right.'94 She threw her head from side
to side.'93Who?'94 Derec insisted. '93Avery? We'92ll find him. Do you
mean Dr. Avery?'94 Then he realized that she might be dreaming about
Jeff Leong, the marooned stranger who had been turned into a cyborg when
they were here before. Derec and his companions had helped capture him
when the transformation had adversely affected Leong'92s mind, and had
aided the robot in restoring him to human form. They had sent him off
the planet in a craft one of them could have used.'93Iss not hearing
'91u,'94 said Wolruf. '93Verry ssick.'94 Derec stood up and set the
container of food on the desk, still watching her. She stopped talking,
but her legs were moving slightly. He had seen people move like that
when they were dreaming. '93I guess we'92ll have to let her sleep. Maybe
that'92s all she needs. I think I could use some rest, myself.'93That
couch can be unfolded into a bed,'94 Derec observed. '93Whatever is
wrong with Ariel is in her mind and memory, not her body. She won'92t be
harmed if you will lift her for a moment.'94Mandelbrot bent down and
gently lifted Ariel in his robot arms as though she was a baby. Derec
fumbled for a moment with the couch, then succeeded in pulling on a
single strap that unfolded it to full size. It was a simple, non-powered
device that was popular among frequent travelers because it did not
force the owner to match power sources or worry about complicated
repairs'93All right,'94 said Derec.Mandelbrot laid her down just as
carefully as before. Derec sat down beside her to loosen her clothing.
She was lying quietly now, as though she was sleeping.'93I am aware,'94
said Mandelbrot, '93that a potential First Law conflict may be
developing.'94'93What is it?'94 Derec asked. This did not seem like the
time to hassle over the Laws of Robotics.'93I recall from our presence
here before that Robot City possesses a very high level of human medical
skill and technology. The First Law may demand that I put Ariel in
contact with the robot called Human Medical Research 1, lest I allow her
to come to harm through my inaction.'94 He trained his photosensors
squarely on Derec.'93But you can'92t! We don'92t dare, at least not
right away!'94 Derec jumped up and paced behind the desk. '93They'92re
almost certain to alert Dr. Avery, and then r II be harmed through your
action. And so will she, probably. The guy has to be crazy.'94'93I
know,'94 Mandelbrot said ruefully. '93I also feel a resonance from the
First Law dilemma I faced in certain events before our recent return
here. I welcome suggestions that will avoid this contradiction. '93Derec
stared at him. '93Suggestions? Hell, I don'92t know.'94 He ran both
hands through his hair and closed his eyes. '93Look, I'92m tired, too.
Suppose you stay in an alert mode, monitoring the city computer, while
the rest of us get some sleep.'94'93As you wish,'94 said Mandelbrot.
'93I will also turn out the light when you are ready.'94Wolruf was
already settling comfortably into one of the chairs. Derec sat softly
next to Ariel, trying not to disturb her, and pulled off his boots.
Moments later, he was stretched out in the sunlight, surrounded visually
by the strange beauty of Robot City. He felt strangely naked without
visible, opaque walls around him, despite the secrecy of this room and
the efficiency of Mandelbrot, who was a match for any other robot they
might encounter.'93Mandelbrot,'94 said Derec.'93Yes.'94'93See if you can
figure out how to turn off these viewscreens. That sunlight is bright,
and we don'92t exactly have curtains in here.'94'93Yes, Derec.'94Derec
was certain, the more he thought about it, that they would be safe here.
One of the few certainties about the mad genius named Dr. Avery was that
he was truly paranoid, and possibly becoming more so as time passed. He
surely knew that Derec had been in this office once before, and he
obviously knew that he had been in Avery'92s laboratory. A true paranoid
would not continue to use either one after his '93opponent'94 had
learned their locations.His body was tired, more tired than it should
have been. He hated to admit it to himself, but his time to find Dr.
Avery was quickly growing shorter. Worst of all, he might reach the
point where he could think clearly but would be unable to carry out any
plans. As sleep approached, his mind went to his basic problem: the
chemfets in his body.Dr. Avery had captured him when they had been on
Robot City before. At that time, however, Ariel'92s illness had been
entering a critical phase. Derec had escaped and fled from Robot City,
hoping to find a cure for her disease. They had wound up on Earth. Only
then had he realized what Dr. Avery had done to him in the laboratory
while he had been a prisoner.The chemfets were microscopic circuit
boards with biosensors that interfaced his body. These tiny circuit
boards were capable of preprogrammed growth and replication, and
apparently Dr. Avery had programmed them. He had also planted a monitor
in Derec'92s brain that told him what they were and what was happening
now: a tiny Robot City was growing inside his body.Derec had no idea why
Avery had done this to him, but the monitor had made one fact clear: the
number of chemfets was growing, and some of them were joining together
to grow larger. They were already interfering with his ability to
coordinate his movements normally, and they were going to kill him from
the inside'97paralyze him, he suspected'97if he didn'92t get rid of
them.Only Dr. Avery could do that. Derec had no idea how he could
convince the man to do so.Derec woke up spontaneously, looking at a
plain ceiling of light gray. For a moment, he was completely
disoriented. Then, remembering he was back in Avery'92s office, he sat
up with a start of near-panic and looked around.Ariel was sitting at the
desk. She flinched in response to his movement and looked at him. Her
expression was at first blank, then relaxed to a shy smile.'93Ariel! How
are you feeling?'94 Derec smiled in embarrassment himself at his sudden
awakening, and ran a hand through his hair to brush it out of his
eyes.'93I feel all right. I just...get confused sometimes.'94 Her voice
was apologetic.Derec swung his feet over the edge of the bed and looked
around. Mandelbrot had found a way to opaque the walls, which were the
same light gray as the ceiling, and now stood motionless with his back
to Derec. Wolruf was awake, sitting quietly in the chair where she had
been when he had gone to sleep.'93How are you?'94 Ariel asked. '93I'92m
able to get several decent dishes out of the chemical processor, by the
way. My memory was a little weak, but I learned some of it from scratch.
Wolruf and I have eaten. Some of it is waiting for you.'94'93Thanks.
I'92m okay,'94 said Derec. He had benefited a great deal from the sleep.
'93A quick trip to the Personal and I'92ll be fine.'94A moment later, he
was standing in the cramped shower stall, letting steaming water massage
his scalp with needle spray and run down his back. He stood with his
head down, eyes closed. The heat made him feel better, telling him just
how poorly he really felt. It was loosening kinks in his neck that he
had never had before.They were all refreshed as though it were morning,
which it could not be. Their biological clocks would adjust soon
enough.He forced himself to leave the shower and dress again. If at all
possible, he would disguise his ailments from his companions. Ariel and
Wolruf were counting on his knowledge of Robot City to keep them safe
and he would have to do that somehow until they located Dr. Avery. If
Mandelbrot knew how fast the chemfets were interfering with his health,
the robot just might have to turn him and Ariel over to the medical
robots of Robot City under the First Law. That would play right into Dr.
Avery'92s hands.He left the Personal and forced a cheerful
smile.'93I'92ve been reading up in the city computer,'94 said Ariel,
nodding toward the terminal. '93In particular, anything that we were
involved in before.'94'93Really? What have you found?'94'93Did you know
that our visits to the Key Center are recorded here? And this whole
episode with Jeff Leong, the cyborg, when he was running amok?'94'93Were
there any reviews of Hamlet?'94 Derec grinned.'93Not that I noticed.'94
She seemed to miss the joke. '93Oh, and of course the mystery of that
wild, automatic shapechanging mode in the city, and how you stopped
it.'94'93I guess I hadn'92t thought about being in the records much,'94
said Derec. '93I'92m not surprised, though.'94 He thought a moment,
watching the cursor blink on the screen. '93What is different from when
we were here before is being able to get all the information you ask
for. Have you been able to do that?'94'93Yes....'94 She looked at him
thoughtfully. '94I do remember, now...you had trouble getting your
terminal to respond at times.'94Derec nodded. '93There were blocks on
other terminals, all right. This terminal had no blocks, like I said
last night. Still, that just refers to the ones Avery deliberately
installed in the rest of the system. The problem with the city computer
before was that so much information had entered during the fast pace of
the shapechanging mode. It was all in the computer somewhere, but the
information wasn'92t really organized anymore.'94'93If you want to see
what you can do here....'94 Ariel started to get up and move away from
the desk.'93No, not yet.'94 Derec tasted a bit of leftover breakfast and
nodded appreciatively. '93Mandelbrot, have you found any blocks in the
city computer yet?'94'93No.'94 The robot'92s voice was low in both pitch
and volume.Derec and Ariel both looked at him in surprise. Wolruf also
studied his impassive face.'93Mandelbrot?'94 Derec said. '93Come to
think of it, you'92ve been quiet since I woke up. What'92s wrong?'94'93I
have been unable to resolve the First Law contradiction I described to
you last night. I am only functional now because I do not have complete
information on which to base my judgments.'94Ariel looked back and forth
between them. '93What contradiction? Was that after
I...fainted?'94'93Yes,'94 said Derec, ignoring a tightening in his
stomach. '93Go on, Mandelbrot. Can I give you instructions or
explanations that will make a difference?'94'93I do not see how.
Ariel'92s condition is a serious matter. The robots at the Human Medical
Facility here demonstrated a potential that I must logically
consider.'94'93Dr. Avery is crazy. If he gets us in his power, that may
threaten her life'97all of ours.'94'93It is possible, but so far his
greatest interest has been in you. The possible harm to her from Dr.
Avery is not greater than the clear harm that inaction may bring
about.'94'93Are you approaching some kind of conclusion about this?'94
Derec asked.'93Conclusion!'94 Ariel cried. '93How can you just sit
calmly and talk about conclusions? This isn'92t a philosophy class!
He'92s talking about turning us in to the enemy!'94CHAPTER
3RELAPSESDerec was quivering with tension, but he forced himself to stay
clear-headed. '93Mandelbrot?'94'93I am finding it difficult to
concentrate. I am dwelling on this problem and going in circles. If I
enter a closed loop on the First Law, I will be useless to you.'94'93Now
listen to me! Before you go into any kind of closed loop, uh'97okay,
I'92ve got it. Listen.'94 Derec was talking fast, really before he had
more to say. '93Urn....'94'93I am listening,'94 said Mandelbrot.'93Maybe
'91u have more information to give '91irn,'94 Wolruf suggested. She got
down from the chair and stood in front of Mandelbrot, straining her neck
to look up at him.'93Yes! That'92s it,'94 said Derec. '93Mandelbrot,
we'92re working with limited information on Ariel. The process she went
through was experimental, but I think it worked. I reprogrammed her
memory myself. We have to give it a chance.'94'93People will have
relapses,'94 Ariel pointed out, in a tightly controlled tone. She was
gripping the edge of the desk so hard that her fingertips were
white.'93These appear to be similar to a mechanical malfunction,'94 said
Mandelbrot. '93Certainly medical care is a logical and customary
treatment to facilitate healing.'94'93No!'94 Ariel wailed. '93People
don'92t just fall apart in a straight line like machines. I may be just
fine.'94 Her voice broke at the end, and she blinked back tears, turning
away from Mandelbrot.'93I understand,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93Inaction
may not necessarily cause further harm to you.'94'93Exactly.'94 Derec
let out a long sigh of relief and caught Wolruf'92s eyes. She made a
face that might have been her version of a wink and then hopped back up
on the chair.'93Maybe we can build on that and find out something at the
same time,'94 said Derec. '93Mandelbrot, I want to see if your attempts
to get information through the city computer are blocked. That will tell
us just how special this terminal is. Can you concentrate now on a
function of that kind?'94 Distracting him wouldn'92t hurt at the
moment.'93Yes, Derec. I judge that the apparent First Law contradiction
is still incomplete. The potential loop will close no further unless I
receive more evidence that inaction could cause harm.'94'93Good.'94
Derec sat down on the edge of the desk. '93Now, last night we found out
that the computer would not admit the existence of this office to you. I
want to know if that has changed. I ordered it to block all information
about our presence here. See if you can call up any hint of our using
the facilities here.'94'93I am trying several avenues,'94 said
Mandelbrot. His voice was returning to normal. '93I'92m asking for
information about intruders, humans, and energy consumption or oxygen
usage in the Compass Tower.'94'93What do you get?'94'93All is as you
instructed,'94 he answered promptly. '93I am told that the office is not
listed anywhere. Nor are the water or nutrient tanks in the chemical
processor listed. No alerts of any kind have been entered since our
arrival.'94'93Good!'94 Derec grinned. '93So we really are safe here. Our
next problem is to get a line on Avery. Ariel, may I?'94 He slid off the
desk and nodded toward the terminal.'93Of course.'94 She rose carefully,
leaning her fingertips on the desk as though she was worried about her
balance.'93Derec,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93I suggest that we attempt
parallel work with the city computer. The result should confirm or
disprove your suspicions.'94'93Good idea. I'92ll enter questions and
tell you what I'92m doing.'94 Derec seated himself comfortably and
started on the keyboard. '93All right. How many humans are on the planet
of Robot City right now?'94'93I learn none,'94 said Mandelbrot.'93Ha!
I'92ve got one,'94 said Derec triumphantly. '93Where is this human at
the present time?'94'93SEATED BEFORE THIS TERMINAL,'94 said the
terminal.Derec smiled wryly despite his disappointment. '93Serves me
right,'94 he muttered. '93Wait a minute'97'94 He typed in the question,
'93How do you know I'92m human and not a robot?'94'93THE CONSUMPTION OF
NUTRIENTS FROM THE CHEMICAL PROCESSOR, USE OF WATER IN THE PERSONAL, AND
CHANGES IN THE COMPOSITION OF THE AIR IN THE OFFICE INDICATE THE
PRESENCE OF AT LEAST ONE HUMAN. THE PROBABILITY OF THE PRESENCE OF MORE
THAN ONE HUMAN BASED ON THE AMOUNT OF HEAT GENERATED IN THE ROOM IS
HIGH. COMBINING THIS FACT WITH THE ABILITY OF ROBOTS TO CONTACT THE CITY
COMPUTER DIRECTLY THROUGH THEIR COMLINKS INDICATES THE PROBABILITY THAT
YOU ARE HUMAN.'94Derec felt a twinge of panic. '93So the use of this
office has been recorded in the computer, after all?'94 His fingers
fumbled on the keys, and he had to retype the question
twice.'93NO.'94'93Explain your knowledge of this information,
then.'94'93INFORMATION FROM THIS OFFICE IS STORED IN LOCAL MEMORY AT
THIS TERMINAL. IT HAS NOT BEEN SENT TO THE CITY CENTRAL COMPUTER, PER
YOUR INSTRUCTION.'94'93Is the information in your local memory available
to anyone else, anywhere?'94'93NEGATIVE.'94Derec relaxed then, rubbing
his fingertips against each other. At some point, he would no longer be
able to use the keys. Someone else could handle the keyboard if
necessary, but that would mean admitting his disability.'93What'92s
wrong?'94 Ariel asked.'93False alarm.'94 Derec placed his fingers back
on the keyboard and thought a moment. Then he entered, '93What other
locations indicate similar evidence of human presence on this
planet?'94'93NONE.'94'93I'92m not surprised.'94 He looked at the others.
'93Wherever our paranoid friend is hiding, he had the presence of mind
to keep that information unavailable, even here.'94'93Maybe especially
here,'94 said Ariel, '93if he was expecting us to search this
office.'94'93Maybe '91e lefft,'94 suggested Wolruf. '93Used a Key to
leave the planet entirrely.'94'93Oh, no.'94 Ariel looked from her to
Derec. '93You don'92t think he left Robot City, do you? How can we find
him then?'94Derec set his jaw grimly. '93Wherever he is, we have to pick
up his trail here.'94'93But if he has kept all the information out of
the computer, we won'92t have any to find.'94 Ariel'92s voice was
cracking again.Wolruf moved to her side in a silent offer of moral
support.'93Mandelbrot,'94 said Derec. '93Find out if any humans have
been treated at that medical facility. If you can think of any more
avenues for reaching evidence of humans on the planet, go ahead and
follow them. And if you don'92t get any results, let me try.'94'93Yes,
Derec.'94Derec put his hands on the keyboard again and missed the first
two keys he tried. '93Wait a minute. We can shortcut this. Mandelbrot,
you sit down at this terminal and use it.'94 He got up carefully,
looking at Ariel and Mandelbrot to see if they had noticed his mistakes
on the keyboard. If so, they did not show it.Wolruf was eyeing him
closely, but she said nothing. Instead, she left Ariel'92s side and took
a position where she could watch the screen as Mandelbrot worked on
it.'93Mandelbrot,'94 said Derec, '93turn on the viewscreens.'94 He
turned to face one wall, hands on hips.A moment later, the little office
was flooded with light. On all sides, Robot City bustled on the ground
far below them, stretching away until it vanished over the horizon.
Above them, the sky shone down with brilliant sunlight.Ariel turned
slowly, as though in awe. '93I don'92t recognize any of it,'94 she said
softly.Derec saw towers, spires, swirls, and loops in the architecture
he had never seen here before, either. Humanoid and function robots
moved about on the streets and on vehicles or machinery everywhere. He
remembered that single-rnindedness, that sense of purpose, from the
asteroid where he had first seen the Avery robots.Circuit Breaker, the
distinctive structure that had revealed the ability of Robot City robots
to think and dream creatively, was gone.'93The changes are extensive,'94
said Derec. '93It'92s not your memory at fault right now.'94'93The
shapechanging has to be stopped,'94 said Ariel. '93It'92s causing the
massive rainstorms every night.'94'93What?'94 Derec turned to stare at
her.She clutched at his chest, looking over his shoulder at visions only
she could see. '93The floods. They'92re caused by the shapechanging mode
in the city'92s central core. We must stop it!'94Mandelbrot had already
left the terminal and was gently reaching out to pull Ariel away from
Derec.'93It'92s just a temporary relapse,'94 said Derec quickly. '93It
doesn'92t mean she'92s getting worse. Understand?'94'93I understand,'94
said Mandelbrot. He was easing Ariel into a sitting position on the bed.
'93You know, however, that discussing the shapechanging mode a short
time ago did not trigger a relapse. Her condition is inconsistent at
best.'94'93Apparently her memories aren'91t anchored in a chronological
perspective.'94 Derec paused, still watching Ariel. His impulse to hold
her, to protect her, was held in check by his fear of somehow making the
relapse worse.Her eyes were closed and she was taking short, shallow
breaths. She was sitting up on her own, though. Gradually, her breathing
slowed down and approached normal.Satisfied that she was out of
immediate danger, Derec continued with his thought. '93Something
triggers a memory, and she relives it as a current experience. Or at
least, it seems that way so far.'94'93A bad experrience,'94 said
Wolruf.Ariel seemed to be gaining her composure. Derec looked out at the
city again. He was sure that the unfamiliar skyline had not resulted
from the old shapechanging mode, but was simply the result of constant
refinement on the part of the robots.Suddenly he moved to the terminal
and entered another question. As before, he made a number of errors, far
more than usual. He slowed down and typed them correctly. '93Is the city
functioning under any defensive overrides of the type represented by the
shapechanging mode it once entered in response to parasites in human
blood?'94'93NO.'94'93Is it operating under any overrides to basic
programming?'94'93NO.'94He stared at the screen, somewhat disappointed.
'93Is something wrong?'94 Mandelbrot asked.'93Not exactly. I was just
thinking that if the city was under an emergency of some sort, I might
have been able to use it to our advantage somehow.'94'93If Dr. Avery is
on the planet, he probably would have dealt with an emergency
already,'94 said the robot.'93Or maybe he left, but no crisis has
arisen.'94 Derec shook his head in resignation. '93He could be literally
anywhere, with a Key to Perihelion. Or with all the Keys the robots
could duplicate, for that matter.'94'93It'92s not shapechanging any
more, is it?'94 Ariel was gazing out at the city.Derec and Mandelbrot
both looked at her in some surprise.'93No,'94 Derec said, relieved.
'93We ended it a long time ago. That danger is passed.'94She nodded,
still gazing out at the city.He watched her for a moment and decided
that leaving her alone might do her more good than grilling her with
questions. She was self-conscious enough already, though her quick
recovery from this episode was encouraging. He just hoped that he was
right about her not needing treatment by the robots. Then he saw
Mandelbrot studying her, also.'93Mandelbrot,'94 Derec said firmly.
'93Her relapse is over.'94'93It may recur, I surmise.'94'93Another one
may occur, but I don'92t think the same one will.'94 Derec hesitated,
thinking about the two episodes he had seen since they had returned
here.'93We have compiled very little evidence for that conclusion,'94
said Mandelbrot.Derec shook his head. '93I think that every time
something of that sort happens, her memories are integrated just a
little more afterward. It'92s part of the growth and replacement process
that I didn'92t recognize at first.'94'93I understand the principle,'94
said Mandelbrot. '93How certain of this theory are you?'94'93Uh'97'94
Derec saw Ariel watching him.Her face reflected more anxiety than he had
ever seen her express, even at the worst of her disease.He looked back
at the robot and cleared his throat. '93I'92m sure of it. Remember, the
growth of her memories and identity was intended all along. These
episodes are just...growing pains.'94Ariel closed her eyes in
relief.Derec sighed. He felt as though he was juggling too many lines of
thought at once'97Ariel'92s recovery, Mandelbrot'92s possible First Law
imperative regarding her, and his own failing condition. What he really
should be doing was finding Dr. Avery.He took a deep breath and tried to
focus his thoughts once more. '93All right. We can figure that Avery has
hidden all direct evidence of his whereabouts from the central computer.
We'92ll have to cast around for indirect evidence that he didn'92t
intend to leave. Anyone have any suggestions?'94Ariel looked at him for
a moment and then returned her gaze to the viewscreens with a slight
shake of her head.Mandelbrot stood quietly, apparently reviewing and
rejecting possibilities.'93We can'92t find him by staying here in this
room, can we?'94 Derec spoke softly, admitting what none of them wanted
to say.'93The principle of identifying useful questions and seeking
their answers through the central computer is sound,'94 said Mandelbrot.
'93Theoretically, the search could be narrowed a great deal in this
manner if we ask the right questions.'94'93And if we can'92t?'94 Derec
demanded irritably. '93What then? Maybe we don'92t have enough
information to figure out the right questions, no matter how long we sit
here.'94'93Leaving this office to explore the planet greatly increases
the danger to you,'94 said Mandelbrot.'93Now don'92t you start more
First Law objections. Sitting here doing nothing will eventually harm us
the most.'94'93I am not arguing against leaving itself,'94 said
Mandelbrot calmly. '93I do recommend a specific plan of action.'94Derec
shrugged in agreement. '93Like what?'94'93That has yet to be
identified.'94'93We'92re going around in circles!'94 Derec threw up his
arms in frustration. He banged one hand against the desk when he lowered
it and grabbed it in surprise.Wolruf was watching him again.'93I suggest
that Wolruf and I go out first,'94 said Mandelbrot.'93How so?'94 Derec
rubbed his hand surreptitiously, pointedly ignoring Wolruf.'93Consider
this. As a robot, I do not attract undue attention here. On our first
sojourn through Robot City, Wolruf was of no particular interest to the
robots of this community. We have the best chance of gathering
information and returning here safely to report it.'94Derec thought a
moment. '91The terminal here confirmed your report that no special
alerts are out. So the robots aren'92t on the lookout for humans,
particularly.'94'93The presence of humans, however, will at the very
least trigger the applicability of the Laws of Robotics. If their
behavior is changed because of the Laws, even in small ways, the shifts
may be noted by the central computer and attract the notice of Dr.
Avery.'94'93You mean if I instruct a robot to tell me something, he
might be late fulfilling his duties or something.'94 Derec nodded
slowly. '93With someone as paranoid as Dr. Avery, I guess maybe those
small variations might cause a review...if he noticed them.'94'93I am
calculating probabilities only, of course,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93I am
balancing potential benefit against possible danger.'94Derec realized,
suddenly, that he welcomed the chance to rest. He didn'92t think of
himself as a coward, or feel afraid. In fact, the Robot City he
remembered had not been nearly as dangerous as Aranimas, the pirate.
Still, he just didn'92t feel right. Maybe he should lie down.'93All
right, Mandelbrot,'94 he said. '93You two go. We'92ll stay
here.'94CHAPTER 4PRIORITY 4 REGIONAL CONTINGENCY POWER STATIONMandelbrot
climbed up the ladder from the office to the top of the Compass Tower
with Wolruf clinging to his back. They got through the trapdoor without
incident. Then the robot began the long but simple task of descending
the narrow line of footholds down the steep front face of the pyramid.He
almost certainly could have found his way down the labyrinth within the
Compass Tower to the main entrance. However, he did not want to be
questioned by security robots about his presence if he was found there.
Derec had pointed out that if he was questioned about climbing down the
outside of the Compass Tower, he would not have to reveal his knowledge
of a secret entrance.Derec had also told him of how he and Ariel had
painstakingly climbed down these small hand and footholds when they had
first arrived on the planet. They were only as large as a hand or foot
might require, and the severe angle of the pyramid face offered little
margin for error. For a robot, of course, the descent presented no
significant challenge.Mandelbrot spent the time of the descent
considering how best to proceed. When they reached the ground, Wolruf
let out a long sigh and collapsed in relief to the ground.'93Are you
harmed?'94 Mandelbrot asked her.'93No.'94 The little alien shook her
caninoid head back and forth. '93Don'92t like rride.'94Mandelbrot looked
around. A number of humanoid robots were walking briskly on their way;
among them, a much larger number of function robots, of all sizes and
varied shapes, pursued their own duties. In spite of the unfamiliar
architecture, this was basically the Robot City he remembered from his
other visit here.'93What arr '91u going to do now?'94 Wolruf
inquired.'93I must take a calculated risk,'94 said Mandelbrot. In a
space of time too quick for the alien even to notice, he made contact
with the central computer and said, '93I am a humanoid robot requesting
duty assignment in the city matrix.'94'93WHAT IS YOUR PRESENT
ASSIGNMENT?'94'93None.'94'93WHAT WAS YOUR PREVIOUS
ASSIGNMENT?'94'93None.'94'93YOU ARE IN ERROR. ALL ROBOTS IN ROBOT CITY
HAVE BEEN ASSIGNED DUTIES. IF YOU HAVE RECENTLY BEEN RELEASED FROM A
REPAIR FACILITY, YOU SHOULD GO THROUGH NORMAL REASSIGNMENT CHANNELS AT
THAT FACILITY. '93'93I have not been recently released from a repair
facility. I am prepared to undertake duty assignment.'94'93WHAT IS YOUR
SERIAL NUMBER?'94Mandelbrot invented one that fit the pattern of other
serial numbers he had noticed on his last visit.'93IT IS NOT ON FILE.
ARE YOU A VISITOR TO ROBOT CITY?'94That was the question for which
Mandelbrot was waiting. The way the computer responded to his answer
might determine whether or not he would become a fugitive. '93You should
have me on record. I have past history on Robot City.'94 It was not a
falsehood, but it was deliberately misleading. He didn'92t add that he
was on record by the names Alpha and Mandelbrot, not by the number he
had just made up. The need to protect himself and his human companions
allowed him to feel comfortable with the misdirection.'93YOUR NUMBER IS
NOW ON FILE. YOU ARE NOW INCORPORATED INTO THE CITY MATRIX. YOU ARE
ASSIGNED TO DUTY AT THE PRIORITY 4 REGIONAL CONTINGENCY POWER STATION.
REPORT IMMEDIATELY.'94 The computer proceeded to give city coordinates
for its location.Mandelbrot waited to see if the computer would attempt
a, shift in his programming, but it did not. No matter how paranoid
Avery was, he had not programmed suspicion of unemployed robots into the
central computer. Now Mandelbrot was relieved.'93I have been assigned a
duty in the city matrix,'94 he said to Wolruf. '93This will aid me in
gathering information.'94 He was aware that the little alien had hardly
had time to blink while he had conducted his exchange with the central
computer.'93Wherr do we go?'94 She asked.'93We are going to Priority 4
Regional Contingency Power Station. This way.'94'93What is it?'94 Wolruf
asked as she ambled along beside him, gazing around at the sights.'93I
surmise from its name that it supplies power to a limited portion of the
city in the event of a failure in the main system. Priority 4 suggests a
relatively important part of the city.'94'93Long walk?'94'93It is a
greater distance than you would care to walk. However, I believe we will
find a tunnel stop shortly along this street. Certainly one will be near
the Compass Tower.'94Mandelbrot did not want to consult the central
computer again so soon for anything he could learn himself. The current
location of tunnel stops was an example. Every time he asked a question
that a Robot City robot should already know, he would increase the
chances of being investigated or even forcibly repaired.They located a
tunnel stop promptly, and rode down the moving ramp into the tunnel
itself. Mandelbrot again placed Wolruf on his back, before stepping into
the cramped platform booth. There was just enough room for both of them.
He gave his destination to the console and let it figure out the nearest
tunnel stop. Then they were off, riding the upright booth as it slid
forward on the siding.A moment later, the booth swung into one of the
trunk lines with the other moving platforms. Humanoid robots rode with
them on all sides, as motionless as Mandelbrot within their booths. The
computer sped them up, slowed them down, and changed them from one
parallel trunk line to another as the traffic flow changed as a result
of some booths entering from sidings and others exiting onto them.The
booth they rode slowed smoothly, swung onto a siding, and glided to a
stop. Mandelbrot stepped out and rode the ramp up to the street before
setting Wolruf down again.This area of the city was not noticeably
different from the one they had just left. The city was too new to have
old and new neighborhoods as such. It was highly organized, of course,
but much of the pattern was not readily visible, such as the power grid
or the tunnel system.Mandelbrot oriented himself and led Wolruf to the
power station. It was hardly more than a door in a very tall, narrow
building wedged between others on three sides. Just as he entered, he
used his comlink to report his assumed serial number, his name, and a
request that communication be spoken aloud. In work stations of this
kind, robots in Robot City often used their comlinks exclusively.'93I am
the Station Supervisor,'94 said a humanoid robot inside the door. '93My
name is Tamserole. I was told to expect you, Mandelbrot. Why do you wish
to speak aloud?'94'93I have a personal preference for this.'94
Mandelbrot did not draw attention to Wolruf by looking at her or
mentioning her. He knew she would listen carefully to any conversation.
'93What are my duties here?'94 He waited to see if Tamserole would
require the use of comlinks.'93Come with me.'94 Tamserole had glanced at
Wolruf, but apparently had no interest in her.Mandelbrot and Wolruf
followed Tamserole into the building. The inside was quite narrow and
its single impressive feature was a pillar of shiny metal alloy, one
meter thick, rising into the ceiling. A console of some kind was set
into its base.'93Our task,'94 said Tamserole, '93is to make this unit
fully automated so that l'97and now you, of course'97may discontinue our
duties here and accept our migration programming.'94Mandelbrot had no
idea what migration programming was, but Tamserole obviously assumed he
knew. At the moment, Mandelbrot did not dare reveal his ignorance.'93I
do not understand why I have been given an assistant by the central
computer, when I have been told to reduce staff here to zero, not to
increase it,'94 said Tamserole. '93Do you know why?'94'93I believe
so,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93The central computer could not locate any
past duty file on me. I think it decided to give me a redundant position
until I prove my efficiency.'94'93That is logical enough,'94 said
Tamserole. '93I wish I had been informed, however.'94'93What is my
duty?'94 Mandelbrot asked again.'93I have been changing the procedure
since learning you would join me,'94 said Tamserole. '93Until now, I
have been programming the local memory of the central computer terminal
in this console to make the judgements I have previously made myself. I
will now leave you here to familiarize yourself with what I have done.
Improve on it if you can.'94'93What is your new duty?'94'93I located
areas in the power system that can be streamlined. I have already
instructed function robots assigned to this station to meet me at
certain areas of the city. I will supervise their improvements and
attempt to identify other potential ones on the spot.'94'93Very well.'94
Mandelbrot moved to the console and began studying the various
readouts.Wolruf followed him unobtrusively.Tamserole left the station
without further discussion.Mandelbrot first looked quickly through the
information that told him the range and system that the station
governed. As he had surmised, this was a backup facility that only went
on line when and if the main power system failed. Once he had learned
some basic information about his new duty, he ignored his work in order
to call up the central computer through the console.Questions posed
through the console would initially be interpreted by the central
computer as normal activity at the power station. If they aroused enough
suspicion, of course, the central computer would realize that they were
irrelevant to station duty and might be coming from the same humanoid
robot who could not explain his recent past. Mandelbrot could not,
however, pass up this opportunity.Since the central computer had already
refused to admit that Dr. Avery was on the planet, he would have to
begin with indirect approaches. At least he had more information to work
with than he had had in Avery'92s office.'93What is migration
programming?'94 He asked.'93PROGRAMMING THAT INSTRUCTS EACH HUMANOID
ROBOT TO REPORT TO ITS ASSIGNED ASSEMBLY POINT.'94'93What is the purpose
of this programming?'94'93TO INSURE THAT EACH ROBOT ARRIVES ON SCHEDULE
AT ITS ASSIGNED ASSEMBLY POINT.'94That was no help.'93What is the
purpose of the assembly point?'94'93IT IS A RENDEZVOUS SITE FOR
MIGRATING ROBOTS.'94'93What will the robots do at their assembly
points?'94'93THEY WILL FOLLOW THEIR PROGRAMMING.'94'93What will their
programming be at that time?'94'93IT WILL VARY WITH EACH
ROBOT.'94Mandelbrot was about to ask for an example when the computer
returned with its own question.'93WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF YOUR
QUESTIONS?'94Mandelbrot considered aborting the dialogue, but did not
want to raise any further questions about his behavior. He answered
cautiously. '93To learn why robots are migrating and what they will do
at the assembly points.'94'93YOUR MIGRATION PROGRAMMING IS SUFFICIENT
INFORMATION FOR YOU AT THIS TIME.'94Mandelbrot did not dare reveal that
he had not received such programming. If the city realized that, it
would almost certainly try to program him. He might lose his
independence in that event, and become an integral part of the city
matrix. He looked down at Wolruf, who was waiting patiently.'93I will
fulfill my duties here for a time and try to gather more information,'94
said Mandelbrot. '93Do you feel safe in moving around on your
own?'94'93Yess,'94 said Wolruf. '93Will walk around. Come back herr to
meet u'92. Okay?'94Mandelbrot considered the central computer. If he
inadvertently alerted it in some way and triggered an investigation, he
would not want to remain here. '93I prefer a neutral site. Can you get
back to that tunnel stop we used to get here?'94'93Yess,'94 Wolruf
hissed with her version of a grin. She obviously thought it a silly
question. '93 '91U say when.'94Derec was lying on the couch with his
eyes closed, tossing fitfully. He had eaten as much as he wanted, though
he had had to force down enough to constitute even a small meal. Before,
he had felt too weak to sit up; now, he was too restless to
relax.'93Turn over,'94 Ariel said gently.'93Huh?'94 Derec started to
look up at her, but he felt her hands slide under his shoulders and push
him carefully onto his other side.'93Lie face down,'94 she said.He
welcomed the chance to follow directions instead of make decisions. When
he tried to push himself to roll over all the way, though, his hands
kept slipping on the fabric. Both his arms flailed weakly, accomplishing
nothing. Finally, her slender fingers groped under his arms for a moment
and gripped him just enough to help him onto his front.Derec let out a
long sigh and closed his eyes. Her fingertips began massaging the
muscles of his upper back. Instantly, the tension began to break a
little at a time.As he relaxed, he concentrated more on the relief in
his muscles that her massaging brought about. He could feel tiny
vibrations each time she pushed, as though very slight kinks were
snapping. It was like loosening any ordinary adhesion that might build
up, such as a crick in one'92s back, only they were very small.'93Is
this helping?'94 She asked.'93Yes,'94 he whispered, not wanting to put
out the energy to speak aloud. '93It'92s wonderful.'94She gradually
worked her way downward. He could feel her breaking these kinks all the
while. As more of his muscles were freed of them, he was able to relax a
little more, and he became drowsy.She continued for a time without
speaking.'93You really feel bad?'94 Ariel spoke softly after a while.
'93I mean, you haven'92t been awake that long.'94'93Sleepy,'94 he
whispered faintly. Her fingertips were a persistent, rhythmic source of
pleasure. They moved back up to his shoulder muscles again and broke
more of the adhesions.He stopped relaxing. After a moment, he noticed it
himself. As he started to wake up again, he opened his eyes, wondering
what had happened.'93Feeling better?'94 She asked cheerfully.'93No. Not
exactly.'94'93What is it? Should I stop?'94'93Could you'97I mean, would
you mind doing my upper back again? Right away?'94'93Sure.'94 She
returned her hands to the area where she had started, and where she had
just kneaded a second time already.'93Thanks.'94 Derec paid close
attention this time. The same kinks were loosened as before. He felt the
same vibrations, the little snappings that relieved him of tension in
the muscle.Only those kinks had returned almost instantly. Not as many
were back, at least not yet. He felt fewer this time than either time
before. Still, the pattern was clear. The massages would have to be
constant to do him any good.'93Is that better?'94'93Uh'97it'92s fine.
Look, I don'92t want you to tire yourself out. Thank you. It does
help.'94 That was true, but he couldn'92t have her do so much work
indefinitely for relief that lasted only a matter of seconds, or perhaps
a few minutes.'93I'92m glad.'94 Ariel quit, but remained sitting next to
him, flexing her fingers.'93Could you help me turn over?'94'93Of
course.'94Again, his arms were weak and rubbery when he tried to push
himself onto one side. She took his shoulders and brought him around in
a kind of twist, where his pelvis and legs lay prone, but his upper body
lay on one side. Then she moved to his legs and, with considerable
effort, pulled him entirely onto his side.'93There.'94 She let out a
breath and smiled.He looked up to study her face. His secret hadn'92t
lasted very long. He was clearly in serious trouble and worsening
rapidly.'93Derec? What is it?'94'93I don'92t see how I'92m going to make
it.'94'93What? What do you mean?'94'93I'92m so tired. And weak. You can
see for yourself. Avery could be anywhere on the planet, and I don'92t
think I have much time.'94 Even his tongue was slurring a little.'93You
shouldn'92t talk like that.'94 Her voice was sharp with some of her old
spirit. '93Mandelbrot can do anything a robot can do, plus some extras.
And hasn'92t Wolruf proven herself many times over?'94'93The time,'94
said Derec. His anger flared, giving him energy. '93We just don'92t have
much time. Sure, I think we'97or they, anyhow'97can find Avery sooner or
later. But it may be too late for me.'94'93After everything that'92s
happened to us? You'92re going to give up now? Come on!'94'93Well, what
can I do? Just lie here?'94'93Maybe we can still think of something. We
got away from Aranimas, didn'92t we? We got out of Rockliffe Station,
and we solved the shapechanging and the murder mystery'97or I should
say, you did....'94 Her voice trailed off.He waited a moment, expecting
her to continue. When she didn'92t, he looked up at her.She was staring
at him with horror on her face. Startled, he raised up enough to look
himself over, but saw nothing unusual. He passed his hand in front of
her face but she did not react.'93Ariel,'94 he said firmly.'93It'92s
Derec,'94 she whispered. '93He looks just like Derec. It'92s
impossible.'94 Suddenly she turned and leaped off the bed, only to run
into the desk almost immediately. Her legs buckled and she thumped hard
on the floor, blinking rapidly.Derec forced himself up on one elbow and
reached down to grip her arm. '93Ariel. Can you hear me?'94She was
looking around the room very slowly. At first she didn'92t seem to hear
him, but then she nodded, almost imperceptibly. '93You'92re up,'94 she
said, surprised.'93Not very far.'94She reached back with her hand and
slapped him across the face hard, leaving his cheek stinging from the
blow.Derec sat up straight, swinging his legs over the side of the bed.
'93Are you crazy? What'97'94'93Look at yourself!'94'93Myself? What are
you talking about?'94'93You'92re sitting up. Derec, you have to stay
alert. I don'92t know if it'92s the adrenaline or the fear or the,
the...I don '91t know what. But when I went into a fugue state again,
the emergency started bringing you back to normal.'94'93And then you hit
me...and I sat up.'94 Derec nodded slowly. '93I'92m hardly back to
normal, but I see what you mean.'94'93Don'92t give in to it, Derec, You
have to fight it.'94'93All right. I get it. It'92s like cold when
you'92re in danger of freezing. You have to move around and keep the
blood circulating. Something like that.'94 He stood up, and winced at
the stiffness in his joints. '93I still hurt allover.'94Ariel rolled the
desk chair into position for him. '93Come on. Back to the terminal. The
work will keep your mind busy, and maybe we'92ll think of something
useful.'94CHAPTER 5EULERMandelbrot realized the time had come for him to
rendezvous with Wolruf. Since he might still benefit later from acting
within the city matrix, he did not want simply to abandon his duty.
Tamserole had not returned, so he took the greater risk again of
reporting to the central computer.'93This is the Priority 4 Regional
Contingency Power Station. I am reporting a leave of duty because my
supervisor is not present to receive it.'94'93WHERE IS YOUR
SUPERVISOR?'94'93I do not know. He is fulfilling his duty
elsewhere.'94'93WHY ARE YOU LEAVING YOUR DUTY?'94'93I have an
emergency.'94'93EXPLAIN IT.'94'93I do not have time.'94 Mandelbrot broke
the connection, hoping that he would be able to return to duty here
later if it would be useful. He did not have an explanation yet.
Attempting to create one could wait until it was necessary. Considering
the immense size of the central computer and its total data, the
oddities of his behavior might still escape the notice of Dr.
Avery.Mandelbrot had spent his relatively brief time at the station
actually performing his duty. He had made some progress in creating an
autonomous system that would free Tamserole to activate migration
programming, but he had not quite finished it. If he had, he might have
been able to leave without suspicion. He was not certain.One problem
Mandelbrot faced was that he was intellectually distinctive from the
robots of Robot City and at any time might reveal his differences by the
questions he asked or the actions he took.Mandelbrot rode down the ramp
of the tunnel stop and saw the little alien sitting calmly to one side
of the loading area. She was in a slight shadow, out of the way of
robots getting on and off the platform booths. When she saw him, she
stood up impatiently.Mandelbrot did not speak right away. Instead, he
lifted her onto his back and stepped into one of the booths, where they
would not be overheard by accident. The booth would not start until it
had a destination, so he entered the one for the Compass Tower. They
could change their minds later if necessary.'93Have you learned
something?'94 he asked once the booth was on its way.'93Yess,'94 Wolruf
hissed eagerly. '93Robots moving everywherr. Change city so that fewer
robots arr needed at each place. Then they leave theirr
dutiess.'94'93The migration programming. Do you have any clues about
what that means?'94'93No.'94'93I don'92t want to take the risk of asking
the central computer myself or asking through the station terminal, for
fear of attracting too much attention. We'92ll have to return to the
office.'94'93Good,'94 said Wolruf, with her caninoid grin. '93Getting
hungry now, anyway.'94Derec was forcing himself to sit up at the
terminal despite the painful stiffness in his back. He had been asking
the central computer all kinds of questions, anything either he or Ariel
could think of, shooting wildly in the dark. So far, they had not
discovered anything that led them anywhere.The blank screen shone
patiently in his face. '93Any more ideas?'94 he asked her.'93What about
those robots at the Key Center? If my memory serves'97'94 She smiled at
the irony. '93If it serves, they seemed to be chosen for their high
quality. What are they doing now?'94'93Good idea. Let'92s see.'94 Derec
asked, '93What activities are underway at the Key
Center?'94'93NONE.'94Derec straightened in surprise. '93Where is Keymo
and the team of robots assigned to him?'94'93KEYMO IS AT THESE
COORDINATES.'94 The central computer gave some numbers. '93NO TEAM IS
CURRENTLY ASSIGNED TO HIM.'94'93What is he doing?'94'93HE IS FOLLOWING
HIS MIGRATION PROGRAMMING.'94'93What are the other robots
doing?'94'93THEY ARE FOLLOWING THEIR MIGRATION PROGRAMMING.'94'93Where
are they?'94The computer responded with a long list of coordinates. They
represented a very wide range of locations. Most of them were on parts
of the planet far from here at the heart of Robot City. These locations
had not even existed as part of the city when Ariel and he had first
arrived. Some coordinates, however, were listed more than once.
Keymo'92s location was included.'93What pattern of significance do these
coordinates represent?'94 Derec asked.'93THEY ARE PRECISELY 987.31
KILOMETERS APART. THE PATTERN COVERS ALL THE LAND SURFACE OF THE
PLANET.'94'93Why?'94'93THIS DISTANCE RESULTS IN EXACTLY THE NUMBER OF
ASSEMBLY POINTS DESIRED.'94Derec felt a surge of excitement. '93Desired
by whom?'94'93DESIRED BY THE PROGRAM.'94'93What is the purpose of the
program?'94'93ACCESS DENIED.'94Derec slapped his hand on the desk. He
was too weak to hit it very hard. '93So this terminal is blocked now,
after all. We just didn'92t ask it the right questions before to turn up
the blocks.'94Behind him, Ariel said nothing.'93I wonder. If Avery put
some blocks on this terminal as a precaution before we got here...why
didn'92t he put the standard blocks in? Why did he ignore most of the
blocks the other terminals have but leave some of them?'94On the screen,
the words '93ACCESS DENIED'94 taunted him silently. On the walls all
around them, Robot City bustled in the shining day. The room was
silent.'93All right,'94 Derec said to himself. '93Maybe the block really
isn'92t on this terminal. He'92s set himself up somewhere else, of
course, and he'92s simply blocked whatever he'92s done at that terminal.
That must be it. He hasn'92t thought to block this one. Makes sense,
doesn'92t it?'94When Ariel didn'92t answer, he painfully looked back
over his shoulder at her. '93Ariel?'94She was standing motionless with
her eyes open. They seemed to be aimed at the floor just past the desk,
but she was not blinking. When he put his hand in front of her, she did
not react. He gently reached up to close her eyes with his fingertips.
They remained closed.'93We can'92t wait,'94 he said quietly to himself
as much as to her. '93We can'92t just sit here and try to think our way
out of this. We don'92t have the time.'94He stood up and carefully put
one arm around her shoulders. With gentle pressure, he was able to guide
her to the couch. She walked stiffly and slowly, with her eyes still
closed. He could not get her to sit until he sat down first and pulled
her down into a sitting position next to him.'93Ariel?'94He could see
her eyes moving beneath her closed lids. After the last few episodes he
had seen like this, he didn'92t dare try to bring her out of it himself.
He would probably just make her worse.After a few minutes, he moved away
from her a little bit and watched her. She was sitting straight, rather
primly, with her head up. Maybe she was reliving a trip in the seat of a
spacecraft or something. She offered no clues.Finally she inhaled
sharply and blinked a couple of times.'93Ariel?'94She looked at him and
then at one of the viewscreens.'93Ariel, are you...with me again?'94'93I
did it again, didn'92t I?'94 She reached for one of his hands.'93It was
different this time. You weren'92t shouting or anything.'94 He held her
hand and put his other arm around her.'93I was watching the play,'94 she
said softly. '93It was real, wasn'92t it? You know the one I mean? I
don'92t know what I'92m doing. I can'92t even be sure where I am, or
when I am.'94'93Slow down,'94 he said patiently. '93One question at a
time. You said the play. You mean Hamlet?'94She nodded. '93When we did
it here.'94'93Did it come out any better this time?'94 He forced a
smile, hoping to lighten her mood.She shook her head, not responding to
his humor.'93All right. Look, I'92ve decided something. Let'92s go see
Avernus. Or Euler. Or any of the Supervisors. They'92re probably right
here in the Compass Tower.'94'93Are you sure?'94'93We'92ve been stuck in
here long enough. Come on.'94 He got up, wincing at the shooting pains
in his legs.She stood up reluctantly. He pushed a button on the control
panel on the desk, and a doorway opened in one of the viewscreens. It
was a black maw in the center of downtown Robot City.'93Come on.'94 He
edged carefully out the doorway, looking around. All he saw was the
short spiral staircase, maybe three meters or a little more, that he had
come up when he had first found the office. From here it led down to a
closed door. '93We won'92t find any robots near here. We'92ll at least
be safe until we get out of the taboo area.'94'93All right.'94 She
hadn'92t moved from the couch. '93But what if I...you know. What if I go
into one of my states right in the middle of everything?'94'93We'92ll
just have to chance it.'94 He looked back and saw the reluctance on her
face. '93We'92ve tried being cautious and we haven'92t gotten anywhere.
We have to go.'94'93I might foul you up, Derec. Not knowing what'92s
going on and all. If you want me to stay....'94'93I may need you to save
me, too.'94 He smiled wistfully. '93We'92re still a team, no matter
what.'94She relented, then. '93No matter what.'94 She followed him to
the door and gave his arm an affectionate squeeze.Derec clung to the
rail of the spiral staircase all the way down. His knees burned at every
step. He took a deep breath at the bottom, thankful for the rest as she
came down behind him. Then he opened the door.A short hallway extended
ahead of them. He recognized it and the gently glowing wall panels that
provided light. The end of this hallway marked the nearest limit to the
office that robots were allowed to come. Past that point, he and Ariel
could encounter robots on their normal duties at any time.He walked
forward slowly, watching for shadows and listening for any sound that
would mean unwanted company. If they could get down to the meeting room
of the Supervisors, on a lower level, the robots might assume that they
had entered from the street level. He did not want them to suspect any
other possibility.Ariel followed closely as he moved through the
hallways. These halls were narrow, but this level of the pyramid had
very little floor surface. In just a few moments, they came to an
elevator.He took a deep breath and pressed the single button on the wall
panel. '93About six floors down, if I remember right,'94 he said
quietly. '93Do you remember any of this?'94She nodded.They waited in a
tense silence. When the door began to open, he drew in a sharp breath
and felt her grab a fistful of the back of his shirt. It was empty,
however, and they entered with embarrassed smiles of relief for each
other.He pressed the button for six levels down. The elevator dropped
precipitously, but slowed gently enough and came to a smooth stop.
Again, they stood completely still while the door opened.No robots were
waiting outside the elevator, but for the first time they could hear
sounds of activity. The noises were not specific; perhaps they were no
more than a variety of hums created by function robots cleaning the
rooms and halls. Still, this level was clearly occupied.'93We'92re okay
now,'94 he said quietly. '93In fact, we may want to meet a robot who can
act as a guide. Just remember. If a robot asks how we got in here, our
story is that we came in the front door.'94'93And got lost.'94 She
grinned.'93Uh, yeah.'94The halls were wider here, and the ceilings
higher; to make the trip worse, the maze was far more intricate.
Intersecting halls crossed the main hallways more and more frequently,
and they could look down any of them to see further expansions of the
labyrinth. Long ago, he had guessed that this level was roughly halfway
up the pyramid. The floor surface of this level was very large.'93I just
can'92t remember,'94 said Derec, stopping at an intersection of halls.
He leaned against one of the glowing panels for support. '93We could
wander indefinitely. I'92ve been taking all the largest halls, but they
still haven'92t led anywhere.'94Ariel studied his face. '94You'92re in
pain, aren'92t you?'94'93I can'92t let that stop me, or we won'92t get
anywhere.'94'93Then quit dawdling and come on!'94 Ariel pushed past him
and started down the wider of the two hallways.He smiled weakly as he
followed her. She was being brusque in the hope of angering him, and
causing another brief remission of his condition. It didn'92t work
because he recognized the effort, but he appreciated it as he forced his
burning legs to follow her.Suddenly a rhythmic beeping sound echoed down
the hall toward them. A small function robot, only a meter high, rolled
toward them with a blue light on its front. A small scoop front
functioned as a vacuum, and brushes on retracted tentacles betrayed its
second duty as a sweeper. Its beeping recognition of strangers in the
halls was probably a third function, nearly an afterthought.Derec and
Ariel stopped, watching it hurry forward. It skidded to a halt in front
of them, still beeping.He laughed. '93I guess that'92s our alert. I
thought we'92d rate a siren or two, at least.'94'93It'92s kind of cute.
I suppose it'92s sending out another signal as well, huh?'94'93I'92m
sure it is. Hey, there'92s a familiar face'97if you want to call that a
face.'94 Derec grinned. '93Euler!'94The humanoid robot striding down the
hall toward them was one of the first they had met on the planet. Euler
was one of the seven Supervisor robots whose brains together constituted
one of the complex master computers of the city. His head was molded to
the human model, and he had glowing photocells for eyes. To complete the
pattern, he had a small round mesh screen in place of a mouth.'93Hey,
Euler!'94 Derec repeated. '93Why isn'92t he answering? What'92s wrong
with him?'94Euler walked right up in front of them and stopped. The
little function robot whirred and rolled away, apparently in response to
a comlink order.'93Greetings, Derec. You are not allowed here. Come with
me.'94 Euler stepped aside to let them go first.'93What kind of a
welcome is that?'94 Derec demanded, walking forward reluctantly.
'93Euler, it'92s us. We'92re back. And we need help and
information.'94'93I recognize you, Derec and Ariel.'94 The robot was
walking just behind them both.Derec had the uneasy feeling that they
were being guarded rather than accompanied in a friendly fashion. '93You
used to call me Friend Derec,'94 he pointed out.'93We are conducting
urgent and important business,'94 said Euler. '93You are acquainted with
Robot City and you know you will be safe here. You must leave the
Compass Tower.'94'93I told you we need help!'94 Derec shouted angrily.
'93The First Law! Have you forgotten all about it'97'94Ariel tugged hard
on his sleeve, slowing him down. He shook her off, turning to stop and
face Euler eye to eye.'93No,'94 Ariel insisted. '93Don'92t give anything
away. Something'92s gone wrong.'94Derec froze in his angry posture,
glaring at the impassive face of the Supervisor. He hesitated, absorbing
the unexpected behavior of Euler. She was right.'93What'92s happened?'94
Ariel asked Euler. '93Why are you acting different now?'94'93You are not
allowed in the Compass Tower.'94'93Wait a minute,'94 said Derec. '93What
about your study of the Laws of Humanics? Remember those? You need
humans for that.'94'93Please continue forward. You will be removed by
unharmful force if necessary.'94'93Ha! '91Unharmful force'92? You
don'92t know how fragile we are, do you?'94 Derec laughed
derisively.'93What'92s happened since we were here last?'94 Ariel asked.
'93Have you changed your plans for the city?'94'93Come with me.'94 Euler
reached out with each pincer and took their arms.Even the gentle
pressure caused a snapping of adhesions in Derec'92s arm. He winced in
surprise, though the feeling was partly one of relief. The pincer
immediately withdrew.'93You hurt me!'94 Derec shouted. '93Ariel, come
on!'94 He grabbed her arm and started to run.CHAPTER 6ON THE RUNHis legs
burned painfully and his back felt oddly stiff as he tried to hurry down
the hallway. She was already ahead of him now and pulling him, rather
than the reverse. Behind them, Euler was hesitating, his decision-making
slowed by Derec'92s accusation.Ariel pulled Derec around a corner and
down another hallway. '93They'92ve been reprogrammed,'94 Derec called to
her, panting. '93They must have been. If the robots had evolved new
priorities themselves, they would still have the same
personalities.'94'93Shut up and come on!'94 She turned another
corner.Derec stumbled after her, forcing his legs to stretch out.
'93Look for an elevator!'94They skidded around another corner, trying to
gain traction on the clean, polished floor. Her grip had slid to his
hand, and their arms were fully outstretched as she pulled him along
after her. She turned another corner, continuing a zigzag pattern.'93Do
you know where you '91re going?'94 Derec asked, as quietly as he
could.Ariel slowed to a halt at another intersection of hallways. No
pursuit was evident yet, but in a building this size, the Supervisors
could certainly marshall a large number of function robots to detect
their presence. Some humanoid robots would undoubtedly be around to join
the chase, also.'93No, I don'92t know where I'92m going,'94 she
said.Derec looked behind them and down the four halls that met where
they were standing. '93Where is everybody?'94 He gritted his teeth
against the pains shooting through his legs and his back.'93Come on.'94
Ariel started again, then noticed he was still looking down the other
hallways. She leaned back to grab his hand and pull him after her.They
turned several more corners, always looking for doorways or main
hallways.'93There!'94 Ariel shouted, as they rounded one corner.
'93Isn'92t that an elevator?'94'93Worth a try,'94 he gasped, wheezing as
his chest heaved for air. '93Hit the button. I think we'92re in real
trouble.'94They waited anxiously, looking behind them as they waited. At
last the door opened, and again the elevator was empty. They got inside
and Ariel hit the bottom button.Derec fell back against the wall for
support and closed his eyes. '93I hope nobody'92s waiting for us when
the door opens.'94'93What did you mean, we'92re in real
trouble?'94'93Two things. The way Euler acted, I think Avery
reprogrammed all the Supervisors while we were gone. That means the
whole city is operating under different rules. I'92m also guessing that
as soon as our presence was reported in Euler'92s positronic brain, the
central computer reported right to Avery, wherever he is.'94'93Then why
isn'92t anyone chasing us?'94'93I'92m afraid...he'92s ordered Hunter
robots after us. And the others are simply staying at their regular
duties.'94The elevator door opened into dim light. No one was waiting
for them, however. Derec stepped out first, looking around.They appeared
to be in a small tunnel stop. In most of the others, the multiple tracks
were visible from the loading area. Here, a wall isolated the siding,
keeping it out of the sight of travelers passing on the main trunk.Derec
edged toward the siding and looked around. He could feel the rush of air
moving past him from one side to the other as it blew in from the main
tunnel. Ariel followed him.'93I pushed the '91wait'92 button,'94 she
said. '93They won'92t be able to call this elevator back up.'94He nodded
approval. '93Come on.'94They crowded into the single platform booth
waiting on the siding. He started to punch a code into the console, then
hesitated.'93What'92s wrong? We have to get away from here as fast as we
can.'94 She tugged on his arm.He entered a code for a tunnel stop just a
short distance away and the booth started to move. '93The tunnel
computer is a branch of the central computer. As soon as someone asks,
it will report our destination.'94'93What?'94'93That'92s right.'94 He
nodded grimly. '93We have to get away from here and get out quick. If we
ride too long, we'92ll have a welcoming committee by the time we
stop.'94The transparent booth followed the siding around a curve and
onto one of the parallel tracks in the main tunnel. Derec looked around
anxiously at the stolid robots riding nearby booths, but none showed any
interest in them. On the other hand, the robots presented their
customary expressionless aspects while riding the booths, and if one was
scared enough '97as Derec was now'97they seemed stern.A paranoid might
easily imagine that they were secret escorts, not incidental
travelers.He shook his head angrily. That line of thought would make him
as crazy as Avery.Suddenly the booth slowed and swung into another
siding. This was an ordinary stop, with a loading area fully visible
from the main tunnel. That stop under the Compass Tower was the only
disguised one Derec had ever seen.'93Nobody'92s waiting for us,'94 said
Ariel as the booth came to its carefully calculated stop. She stepped
out onto the empty loading platform.He came out behind her. '93If Hunter
robots are on the way, they may just be getting the coordinates now.
They can pick up our trail here, though, without going to the Compass
Tower at all. I'97hey!'94'93Derec, what is it now?'94 She wailed.He
whirled and leaned back into the platform booth. After a quick glance
down the way they had come, he entered a series of further coordinates,
punching codes as fast as he could remember them.'93Derec, let'92s
go.'94 She looked down the main tunnel anxiously herself. '93What are
you doing?'94'93That'92ll help.'94 He stepped out of the booth and it
immediately took off down the siding.'93What did you do?'94 She asked as
they stepped onto the moving ascent ramp.'93They'92ll have to check all
the destinations I entered.'94 He grinned, then winced at the pain in
his legs. '94Maybe we got off here; maybe we rode on. They can'92t
know.'94'93Do you think it'92ll matter? Won'92t they just call out more
Hunters to cover every stop?'94'93Maybe.'94 He shrugged. '93If nothing
else, it'92ll spread out their resources some.'94They rode up into the
sunlight and stepped out onto the street. He looked around, feeling
totally exposed. As the only humans on the planet except for Avery, they
could be spotted instantly virtually anywhere they were.'93Our only
chance is if the Hunters are the only ones alerted to the chase,'94 he
said, eyeing an approaching humanoid robot suspiciously. It was alone,
with a number of varied function robots moving about on the street near
it.Ariel followed his gaze and lowered her voice. '93When we were
looking for Jeff, the whole planet cooperated in the alert, didn'92t
they?'94'93They had the First Law giving them an extra push in that
case,'94 said Derec. '93In this case, I don'92t know what they'92ll do.
If even the Supervisors have been reprogrammed, then new priorities may
be in effect for the entire population.'94The humanoid robot walked past
them without interest. Down the block, a couple of others were crossing
the street away from them. They just didn'92t react to Derec and
Ariel'92s presence.'93Shouldn'92t we get out of here?'94 Ariel looked
back down the tunnel stop. '93We'92re just standing around.'94'93I'92m
thinking!'94 Derec whispered hoarsely. His legs were throbbing
painfully. '93We have to know where we'92re going. We can'92t just run
down the sidewalk. I won'92t last. '93'93I'92ve got it. Come on!'94 She
grabbed his hand and started pulling him again.He clenched his teeth at
the shooting pains in his back and his legs as he hurried after
her.Mandelbrot was walking briskly down the sidewalk toward the Compass
Tower with Wolruf trotting alongside. They were coming from the regular
tunnel stop closest to the pyramid. Suddenly, ahead, the distinctive
forms of two tall, powerful humanoid robots with multiple sensory
apparati crossed an intersection in the distance on their way toward the
Compass Tower. They were Hunter robots, programmed with a particularly
high sensitivity to pattern recognition and detail.Mandelbrot stopped
abruptly.'93What iss the matter?'94 Wolruf asked as she came to a
belated halt and looked up at him.'93Hunters,'94 said Mandelbrot.
'93Unless other intruders are present, our group is certainly their
quarry. And they are going right to the Compass Tower.'94 He accessed
the central computer. '93Please inform me of any general alert that has
been issued.'94'93NONE,'94 said the central computer. '93PLEASE IDENTIFY
YOURSELF AND YOUR DUTY TASK.'94'93What is the current assignment of
active Hunter robots?'94 Mandelbrot guessed that he could risk one
suspicious question before the central computer would start a trace on
his transmission.'93IDENTIFY YOURSELF AND YOUR DUTY TASK,'94 the central
computer repeated.Mandelbrot broke the link. '93I can'92t get any
significant information without endangering our position,'94 he said to
Wolruf. '93Since no general alert has been made, only the Hunters are a
danger to us.'94'93To uss?'94 Wolruf asked. '93Or only to the
'91umanss?'94 She looked back toward the Compass Tower. '93Ssee Hunterss
now. Going away from uss to Tower.'94'93We'92ll have to assume that the
alert is for our entire group. If Derec and Ariel have been identified,
then we certainly were included. If they have only been identified as
intruders, we may not have been.'94 Mandelbrot picked up Wolruf and
placed her on his back, where she clung by herself.'93Now what?'94
Wolruf asked.'93I must take one more risk,'94 said Mandelbrot. He
attempted to reach the terminal in the Compass Tower office. No response
came back of any kind. '93Puzzling,'94 said Mandelbrot.'93What?'94'93I
think Derec and Ariel must have left the office Even so, I would
normally receive an acknowledgement of contact from the terminal and a
request for a message.'94'93Perrhaps the offiss is different,'94 said
Wolruf. '93Special arrangement forr Averry.'94'93That is probable,'94
said Mandelbrot. '93In any case, they are not answering. They have
probably fled, which is fortunate. We have no way to reach them through
my comlink, however, and no way of knowing where they are.'94'93Follow
Hunterss,'94 Wolruf said softly. '93Iss only way.'94 Mandelbrot nodded
agreement. '93As long as they do not become aware of us. '93Mandelbrot
took Wolruf to a slidewalk and they rode up to an overpass near the
Compass Tower. It gave them a view of the front of the Compass Tower and
several of its many sides. They could not watch every side, but this was
a reasonable start.Before long, five Hunter robots appeared from the
front entrance of the Compass Tower. Two of them immediately headed for
the tunnel stop that Mandelbrot and Wolruf had just used. Another pair
mounted a slidewalk and took a path roughly at a right angle to the
previous pair. The last Hunter remained on the stationary sidewalk,
within the right angle formed by the routes of the two pairs.'93Good
news,'94 said Mandelbrot. '91They have not caught their quarry, nor are
they confident of doing so immediately.'94'93Bad newss,'94 hissed
Wolruf. '91They know what direction to look in. We musst '91urry, or
will lose them.'94'93Granted.'94 Mandelbrot was already back on the
moving slidewalk, keeping as many of the Hunters in sight as long as he
could. The first pair was soon out of sight, down the tunnel stop. The
second pair was moving quickly on the slidewalk and was intermittently
visible between various buildings. Mandelbrot and Wolruf had now
descended the overpass and were coming around a curve. Not too far
ahead, the last Hunter was just mounting the same segment of
slidewalk.'93'91Ope '91e doessn'92t come thiss way,'94 said Wolruf.The
Hunter did not. It was going away from them and was clearly in a hurry.
Instead of just standing, it was walking forward even as it rode and
Mandelbrot had to keep pace.'93Not too close,'94 Wolruf said.'93Nor can
we afford to lose it. Further, I speculate that other Hunters may have
left the Compass Tower from exits out of our sight. We must remain on
the alert for others. As we approach the humans, the Hunters will all
begin to converge.'94'93Then what do we do?'94 Wolruf asked.'93I don'92t
know.'94CHAPTER 7THE HUNTERSDerec was hobbling painfully, slowed to a
walk, as Ariel finally dragged him to her destination. It was a depot of
the vacuum tube cargo transportation system. He stopped when he saw it,
pulling back on her arm.'93Wait a minute,'94 he said. '93They had
humanoid robots staffing these depots. They'92ll report where we'92ve
gone.'94'93Not if no one asks. Come on.'94 She pulled harder than he
had, and he allowed himself to follow.As they came up on the loading
dock, he saw that he was wrong. A small function robot was alone here
now, loading cargo without supervision.'93What if it doesn'92t let us
get in?'94 He asked.'93Ignore it.'94 Ariel pushed a small container
aside, out of the reach of the function robot'92s extended pincers.The
robot itself was a small ovoid shape with six tentacles ending in
various gripping tools. Without a positronic brain, it would not
interfere deliberately, or respond to the Laws of Robotics, either. As
it rolled forward after the small box, Ariel climbed into the open,
transparent capsule and reached out to help Derec climb in.Reluctantly,
he stepped over the side of the capsule, in extreme pain, and slowly
stretched out inside it.'93We have to go somewhere,'94 he said. '93This
thing doesn'92t have a console inside it. It has to be programmed on the
dock console, over there.'94 He pointed.Ariel hesitated while the
function robot placed the small box inside the capsule between her feet
and Derec'92s head. She squatted down quickly and stretched out just as
the function robot closed the trapdoor.'93We'92re going wherever this
box is,'94 she said. '93The good thing is, we haven'92t left any kind of
trail. That programming is completely independent of us.
'93'93Yeah'97'94His comment was cut short by the sudden acceleration of
the capsule. It moved forward on rollers to push through a door that
gave under the pressure. Then they were in the vacuum tube itself, and
the capsule really picked up speed.As before, the momentum pushed both
of them back against the rear of the capsule. Derec was too sore to
brace himself with his arms, so his head and shoulder were jammed
against the back surface. They were rushing through darkness, blasted by
the air that swept over them from unseen vents.Before, the flight from
their pursuers had kept his adrenaline flowing, and he had experienced
some remission of his stiffness. Now even the excitement of riding the
vacuum tube was not enough to keep the symptoms from recurring. His legs
continued to throb painfully, and the shooting pains in his back seemed
to settle in with the increasing stiffness he felt.His one relief was
that she was right. They had not left a trail.The tube curved upward. He
closed his eyes in anticipation of light, and brilliant sunlight flooded
the capsule. Opening his eyes slowly so they could adjust, he took in
the new scene around them.This section of the transparent vacuum tube
rose high above the ground and used the existing supports of various
buildings to wind over the city. At this altitude'97and it was still
rising'97it would not interfere with earthbound priorities. Their
capsule was shooting along the tube at high speed over what should have
been a spectacular view. He was in too much pain to enjoy it.Suddenly a
thought struck him.'93Ariel,'94 he said, with effort. '93That entire
staff at the Key Center has been reassigned. But it was the Key Center
that provided the vacuum to run this vacuum tube system. That means the
Key Center itself is still working. What'92s going on around here,
anyway?'94She didn'92t answer.'93Ariel?'94 He called louder over the
rushing air, but he knew what her silence meant. With a sinking feeling,
he turned his head to look at her, feeling more snappings in his
neck.She lay on her back, holding herself in position by pushing against
the rear of the capsule with both hands. Her face, turned to the side,
showed exhilaration and excitement as she gazed at the panorama of the
city. She did not seem to see him at all.Derec guessed that she was
reliving their first wild ride in the vacuum tube, long ago. It was a
happier period in some ways, though they had felt burdens at the time.
At least he had been healthy, and she had been functionally so before
her disease had really struck.He turned his face away from her. If she
was reexperiencing those memories, she was probably more comfortable at
the moment. He could let her have that. Then, once they were safely out
of this capsule, they could get their bearings.The tube did not always
go straight. Its various straightaways were broken with curves, loops,
and changes in altitude. These most often simply accommodated
architecture that must have been already in place. Sometimes they
brought the capsule to an intersection of tubes, where curves allowed it
to change direction with minimal loss of speed. Occasionally the shifts
in direction led by depot sidings that their capsule shot past. Every so
often the tunnel dipped underground, and once it ran along the ceiling
of the platform booth tunnel system for an extended period.Finally the
capsule leveled off near the ground and decelerated sharply into a
siding. It stopped abruptly, sliding them both to the front of the tube
with the small package. Derec lay panting on his back, looking up
through the transparent capsule and tube at the impassive face of a
Hunter robot.The slidewalk was the slowest of Robot City'92s powered
transportation systems. Mandelbrot and Wolruf followed the single Hunter
on it with increasing boldness. The various Hunters had obviously taken
different assignments and they had no way of knowing what role this
Hunter actually had.'93Not too close,'94 hissed Wolruf softly over
Mandelbrot'92s shoulder. '93 '91U will get itss attention, I tell
'91u.'94'93I doubt it,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93I now think it, as a
Hunter, maintains an awareness of everything around it. It must have
scanned us and rejected us as its quarry.'94'93That iss sstupid,'94 said
Wolruf.'93Eh?'94 Mandelbrot said stiffly.'93Not '91u. '91Im,'94 she said
patiently. '93Why would theirr order include Derec and Ariel but not
us?'94'93It does seem to be poor programming,'94 said Mandelbrot.
'93However, I do not judge it as stupidity.'94'93Then what?'94Up ahead,
the Hunter still advanced along the moving slidewalk. It seemed to know
where it was going.'93Derec often spoke of the single-rnindedness of
Avery robots,'94 Mandelbrot explained. '93Their task orientation is
narrow. If the central computer or the Supervisors, or even Avery
himself, learned of the presence of Derec and Ariel, perhaps the order
to the Hunters specifically named them and did not extend to anyone
else.'94Wolruf shook her head at the Hunter ahead of them. '93Iss
stupid. Good for us, but still stupid.'94Ahead of them, the Hunter moved
on. Mandelbrot strode tirelessly after it.Derec and Ariel were in no
shape to protest as two Hunter robots lifted them out of the capsule
door. The function robot on the dock waited until the humans were out
before grabbing the small package that had been scheduled for the trip.
Derec hurt allover and was simply too weak to struggle.One Hunter held
him by the arm, and he actually leaned against the robot for support.
Ariel was just now blinking at the Hunter holding her. He recognized
that as one of the signs that she was coming back out of her latest
memory fugue.'93Ariel,'94 he said quietly.She turned at the sound of his
voice, then started at the sight of the Hunters.
'93Derec'97'94'93They'92ve got us,'94 he muttered wearily. He shook his
head as the Hunters turned and started for the nearest slidewalk,
pulling them along in their inflexible grips.Derec still tried to think
of a way out of this. They were positronic robots and would respond to
protests based on the Laws. From past experience, however, he also knew
that they had been programmed to detain and arrest humans without
harming them. He could argue, but he didn'92t know how to win.Besides,
he was just too tired. Derec stumbled several times, forcing himself to
keep up with the Hunter. Finally the Hunter lifted him bodily and
carried him, not out of concern but for efficiency of travel. The other
Hunter lifted Ariel at the same time.The Hunters turned to ride the
slidewalks and Derec found himself facing Ariel.'93How did they get
us?'94 She mouthed the words silently, with a quick glance at her
captor'92s head.'93I don'92t think they care if we talk,'94 he said
aloud. '93I'92m guessing now that some other Hunters started by
questioning the tunnel-system computer. That gave them the coordinates
of the tunnel stop where we got off the platform booth, as I was afraid
might happen. From there they must have used heat sensors to track us
along the street to the vacuum tube depot.'94'93But the capsule in the
vacuum tube goes so fast. How did they get in front of us?'94'93They
must have found out which depot that package was going to and called
ahead to have these guys waiting for us.'94'93After that long ride,'94
said Ariel. '93You make catching us sound so simple.'94'93Apparently it
was,'94 he said ruefully.'93They'92ve got us,'94 she said, in a voice
that cracked. '93Derec, look out! They'92re right behind us in the
conduit'97'94Derec stared at her in a kind of resigned worry as she
entered another displaced memory episode. This one must be from the last
time Hunters had tracked them down and captured them, when they had
tried to run away through the maze of underground conduits in the city.
The vacuum tube hadn'92t worked any better.He ached allover. Having the
Hunter carry him was almost a relief after the effort to escape. Ariel
was squirming and protesting in the grasp of the other Hunter, but she
had no idea of where she was or what was happening now. He closed his
eyes and tried to relax.The Hunters only rode the slidewalks a short
distance. They were soon intercepted by a large function robot in the
shape of a transport truck. The Hunters mounted the open back of the
truck, still carrying Derec and Ariel.The switch to the truck woke Derec
up, and he watched the city pass by as they rode. Ariel was now silent,
her eyes closed. The city streets seemed depopulated to him, at least
compared to what he remembered from their previous visit to Robot City.
Maybe, he thought, the city had expanded faster than the robot
population, causing the robots to spread themselves thinner over the
whole planet.He glanced at Ariel periodically with growing concern. Her
episodes seemed to occur more frequently under stress. That might mean
she was getting worse, not better.The truck stopped several times to
pick up other Hunters from the slidewalks. Now that the search was over,
they would probably be taken to a storage area or something. They were
all unusually tall for humanoid robots, with expansive torsos. Narrow
benches molded from the truck bed itself provided seats for all of them
along the side walls. They sat with their knees drawn up and their
waists level with the top of the walls, watching Derec and Ariel without
a word spoken.The truck slowed down as it approached one more lone
Hunter on a slidewalk. Two familiar shapes caught Derec'92s eye in the
distance, and he stiffened.'93Ariel,'94 he said quietly.She didn'92t
answer.He glanced over his shoulder at Mandelbrot, who was standing on
the stationary shoulder of the slidewalk just a few meters away. Wolruf
had been with him a moment ago, but was now out of sight. The Hunter was
climbing into the back of the truck, making a total of six. Derec
reached over and shook Ariel'92s limp arm.'93Ariel.'94She opened her
eyes and looked at him, still partly disoriented. '93What? Derec, where
are we?'94It was too late to get off the truck, even if the Hunters
could be distracted somehow. The last Hunter was on board and the truck
started up. Then the engine began a high, irregular whine and the truck
coasted back to a stop.The Hunters remained motionless for a short time.
Then Mandelbrot stepped forward. Derec was certain that they were all
communicating through their comlinks.'93What'92s going on?'94 Ariel
whispered.'93I'92m not sure.'94Mandelbrot suddenly climbed onto the
front of the truck and sat down. Derec had trouble seeing what he was
doing, but a minute later the truck began to move forward, Hunters and
all. Apparently Wolruf had sabotaged the function-robot brain and
Mandelbrot had successfully volunteered to operate a manual override.
Derec hoped Wolruf was safe, wherever she was'97most likely under the
truck and hanging on precariously.By now, Ariel had also recognized
Mandelbrot. She and Derec exchanged puzzled glances, still in the firm
grip of the silent Hunters who had taken custody of them. They watched
the Hunters carefully as the truck picked up speed and rolled along, but
the robots seemed perfectly content with the situation.Soon Mandelbrot
had the truck up to a considerable velocity, much faster than the truck
had driven itself. The Hunters gripped the sides of the truck to
stabilize themselves. Derec did not feel any loosening of the hold on
him, however.Mandelbrot was going to try something to free them. Derec
tensed himself in anticipation.He was not too surprised when the truck
suddenly took a sharp left that sent everyone in the back sprawling.
With a hard, painful yank, he wrenched himself free of the Hunter
holding him, knelt on the bed of the truck, and got leverage under the
robot. He gave a heave and flipped the Hunter clean out of the
truck.Next to him, Ariel had almost pulled free of the Hunter holding
her before it regained its balance. All of them leaped to their feet to
restore order, but Derec shouldered another Hunter into the one
grappling with Ariel. The truck took another sharp turn and all the
Hunters stumbled again. Derec watched for anyone to become overbalanced
toward the edge of the truck bed and managed to shove another one out of
the truck.Their massive size and great strength had become a liability
on the unstable truck bed.The vehicle came to a sudden, screeching,
careening halt that threw everyone in the back forward. Mandelbrot, who
had been braced for the stop, leaped into the back of the truck and
hoisted out another Hunter who was still in the act of standing up
again. Mandelbrot rolled one more out on top of that one and then pulled
Derec free of the one grappling with him.Mandelbrot'92s great advantage
became clear to Derec. The first priority programmed into the Hunters
was to find and detain the two humans. The First Law'92s demand that
they not harm the humans overrode the Third Law'92s requirement that
they protect themselves.While the remaining two Hunters grappled with
Derec and Ariel, Mandelbrot was able to get the right leverage under
each Hunter and lift them out of the truck.'93Hang on,'94 Mandelbrot
called out in a remarkably calm voice. He jumped back to the manual
console in the front and drove off.Derec fell back on the bed of the
truck, gritting his teeth in pain but relieved that they had escaped.
Ariel scooted over to him and sat down, her hair blowing in the
breeze.She smiled faintly. '93That was close. How did they'97'94'93Look
out!'94 He shouted.Behind her, over her head, one of the Hunters was
climbing up the side of the moving truck, where it had gotten hold
before the truck had started again. Derec tried to stand, but the pain
in his legs was too great. His feet slipped and he fell back again.The
Hunter was just climbing over the side when it suddenly vanished from
sight and hit the street with a crash.Then Wolruf'92s head appeared over
the side with her caninoid grin. '93Hunterr poorly balanced,'94 she
said, climbing over the side.Ariel jumped up to help her over.Mandelbrot
turned another corner on the city street, then another. After speeding
quickly down another block and taking one more turn, he came to a stop,
a smooth one this time.'93What is it?'94 Derec called, but he was too
uncomfortable to get up. '93Ariel, find out what'92s going
on.'94'93Mandelbrot?'94 Ariel said, standing.Derec could hear both their
voices.'93This vehicle has a comlink that must be fully disconnected,'94
said Mandelbrot. '93Wolruf successfully disconnected the function-robot
brain from the truck controls, but it still works, and the central
computer may be able to locate our position through it. However, as soon
as I finish disabling it.... There.'94Derec heard a heavy object hit the
pavement alongside the truck.'93The truck is now comlink invisible,'94
said Mandelbrot. '93We cannot be tracked through it. We are free to move
about.'94 He sat down at the console again and drove off.Derec let out a
long sigh.CHAPTER 8HIDEOUTDerec stared up at the bright sky overhead as
the truck moved along. Now that the danger of the Hunters was over for
the moment, Mandelbrot proved to be an efficient driver. He took a
number of turns, Derec guessed to complicate the reports of robots who
witnessed their passing.The Hunters would not have taken long to resume
their single-minded pursuit. However, they would now have to follow the
truck'92s path. They had no way of learning its destination and
instructing others to lie in wait for it.As far as Derec knew,
Mandelbrot didn'92t even have a destination.Ariel and Wolruf sat quietly
with Derec, all three slumped so that they were not visible from the
street, though any robot observing from the buildings above had a clear
view of them if it looked.'93That seemed awfully easy,'94 said Ariel.
'93I don'92t understand how those big, strong robots with their
positronic brains could let themselves be thrown overboard like
that.'94Derec laughed in spite of the pain it caused in his ribs.
'93Surprise, mostly. Robot drivers are always very careful. Those Avery
robots have never experienced a human driver speeding along
recklessly.'94'93But Mandelbrot'92s a robot.'94'93Yeah, but he was in
the rescue business. He must have weighed the relative danger to us from
an accident against the certainty of danger if we were taken to Avery,
and decided to throw them off balance'97literally.'94'93That sounds like
a touch of creative thinking, too,'94 said Ariel. '93Lucius, the Cracked
Cheeks, all the other robots who were showing signs of '91contagious'92
robot creativity. Poor Lucius. I wonder where the rest of them are
now.'94'93Come back to prresent,'94 said Wolruf. '93Hunterrs won'92t
give up. Robotss learn fasst. Won'92t fool them the same way
again.'94Eventually, Derec closed his eyes against the light. They were
safe for the moment and could relax. He dozed, still vaguely aware of
the stiffness in his legs and back and of the rhythmic motion of the
truck.He woke up in subdued light to the wonderful sensation of Ariel
massaging his back. They were on a clean floor inside a large building.
The truck was nearby, also inside. A large door, big enough to
accommodate the truck, was in the front wall of the building.'93What is
this place?'94 He asked softly.'93You'92re awake. How are you
feeling?'94 She paused to ruffle his hair affectionately.'93A little
better. Sort of. Where are we?'94'93I'92m not sure. Mandelbrot can tell
you.'94 She turned. '93Mandelbrot, he'92s awake.'94'93Greetings,
Derec.'94 Mandelbrot walked over and looked down at him. '93We are
temporarily safe. The Hunters will have to locate us by questioning
witnesses along our route, and they became quite sparse after a time. I
used an evasive pattern that included doubling back and crisscrossing at
random. I cannot calculate how long we have.'94Wolruf joined them and
sat down quietly.'93You'92re quite a truck driver, Mandelbrot.'94 Derec
forced a smile. '93Thanks.'94'93I had the vehicle under control at all
times,'94 said the robot. '93The First Law '97'94'93I never doubted it,
Mandelbrot. Time to reconnoiter, though, I suppose. What do we do
now?'94 He tried to raise up on one elbow, but winced and lay down
again.'93I will bring you up-to-date,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93This
building houses fully automated, non-positronic equipment that cannot
identify and report us to the central computer.'94'93You mean something
actually happens here? I thought it was a warehouse or something.'94
Derec looked around at all the empty space. '93Avery robots don'92t
waste facilities like this.'94'93The only functioning equipment is in
the far comer from here. It sends vibrations into the ground that report
the firmness of pavement and building foundations within a certain
radius. '93'93That'92s all?'94 Derec laughed. '93All this space for a
systems-maintenance sensor?'94Ariel shrugged. '93You can see for
yourself. Nothing else is here. Four walls, a ceiling, and a
floor.'94'93It follows some information Wolruf and I were able to gather
before the Hunters prevented us from returning to the Compass Tower,'94
said Mandelbrot. '93The robots here are under migration programming of
some kind.'94'93Yes! Did you find out what that is?'94'93Not
precisely,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93It has caused a general instruction,
however, to reduce the staffs allover Robot City to skeleton
level.'94'93That'92s something,'94 said Derec thoughtfully.'93As an
example,'94 said Mandelbrot, '93the size of this building implies
equipment no longer present. I surmise that the original functions
taking place here were either discontinued or improved technologically
to the point where humanoid robots became unnecessary. At that point,
the staff followed its migration programming and departed. '93Derec
nodded. '93Without eliminating or modifying the building for greater
efficiency. This migration must have an extremely high
priority.'94'93And he told me that no general alert has gone out for us,
as you guessed,'94 said Ariel. '93That'92s still the case, isn'92t
it?'94'93Yes,'94 said Mandelbrot.'93Something big has been going on here
for a long time,'94 said Derec. '93Think about it. This must be the
Robot City that Dr. Avery actually envisioned.'94'93What do you mean?'94
Ariel asked.'93When we first arrived, that wild shapechanging dominated
the city. The Supervisors befriended us because they needed help and
they wanted to serve humans.'94Ariel nodded cautiously. '93And solve the
mystery of that murder. We never did figure out who the victim was.'94
She closed her eyes and shuddered. '93Who just happened to look exactly
like you.'94Derec chose not to discuss that. He was afraid of sending
her into another displaced memory episode. '93Then, while the Key Center
was in operation, the city was in a lull while a huge number of Keys
were being duplicated and stored. We were treated with a kind of benign
neglect, wouldn'92t you say?'94'93I guess you could call it that,'94 she
said. '93But they were very cooperative in finding Jeff Leong, the
cyborg.'94He nodded. '93Temporarily a cyborg. The Laws of Robotics
required that. Now, though, everything seems to be changed. And it
happened after we left for Earth and Dr. Avery remained here.'94'93So
every robot here has been reprogrammed?'94'93I think so. The city has
that same sense of obsessive purpose that I first saw on that asteroid.
And I haven'92t seen any sign of the robot creativity we saw before we
left here.'94Ariel tensed. '93Oh, no. You mean you think it was
programmed out of them?'94'93It looks that way to me. Right now,
Mandelbrot may be the only robot on the planet who can think
independently enough to do things like rescue us by driving
crazily.'94'93You said the local robots are now acting like the ones on
the asteroid. You mean the asteroid you were on right after you first
woke up with amnesia, before we met?'94'93Yeah.'94'93I agree,'94 said
Mandelbrot. '93The narrow focus of the Hunters supports your conclusion,
though now Wolruf and I must have been added to the list of
quarry.'94'93We need a new plan of action,'94 said Derec. '93And I'92m
getting sicker all the time.'94'93At the moment, I suggest that you
three remain here,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93I must find a new food source
for you. Also, while the Hunters must now be looking for me also, I
still blend the most with the native population.'94'93'91U '91ave no
wherr to go,'94 said Wolruf.'93Good point,'94 said Derec. '93Maybe you
can get a lead on that from the central computer without giving yourself
away. Go ahead.'94'93I can try. And I still have the use of the
truck.'94 Mandelbrot walked to the far corner of the building and pushed
a button to open the big door that led to the street.'93Does the
equipment here include a terminal?'94 Derec asked.'93No. I will have no
way to contact you.'94 Mandelbrot mounted the front of the truck and
looked down at them. '93We have been out of sight here for a while. If
the Hunters have widened the radius of their search by this time, I may
be able to avoid them. '93'93Good luck, Mandelbrot,'94 said Ariel.
'93Don'92t take too many chances, all right?'94Mandelbrot drove out into
the sunlight and turned onto the street. Someone closed the big door
behind him. As he drove, he kept watch for Hunters, aware that they
would recognize a function truck being driven by a humanoid robot before
they would recognize him in particular. He accessed the central
computer.'93Transmit a topographical map of this planet with land use
identified,'94 he said.'93WHAT IS YOUR IDENTITY AND YOUR DUTY TASK?'94
The central computer asked.He broke the link. The central computer had
not always required that information during every communication, but now
it was asking him every time. Perhaps it was part of the new security
system. He accessed again, just to make sure.'93Give me the location of
agricultural developments on this planet,'94 he said.'93WHAT IS YOUR
IDENTITY AND YOUR DUTY TASK?'94He broke contact again. Identifying
himself was too risky, and doing so still might not get him the
information. He would have to think of something else.In the meantime,
he drove. He kept watch for any break in the grid of city streets and
buildings that might indicate a change of land use, but that would only
work if Avery was growing food in the open...and doing it nearby.
Mandelbrot also turned his attention to smells, in the hope of detecting
chemical processing of edible substances.Far above the planet, a small
spacecraft was just entering the atmosphere, still too distant to be
visible from the ground. It carried only one passenger.His name was Jeff
Leong, and he had come to repay a debt of gratitude.Jeff was entering
the atmosphere of Robot City in a Hayashi-Smith, which was a small,
discontinued model with facilities for ten people. It bore the exotic
name of Minneapolis. The ship computer was doing the flying. Jeff had
managed to rent it with his father'92s credit after persuading him that
no one else could be trusted with the task of making this trip.'93Status
report,'94 Jeff said to the computer, watching the screen that showed
him white clouds ahead and the glittering pattern far below of urban
development.'93EXCELLENT,'94 said the computer. '93SYSTEMS ARE OPERATING
EFFICIENTLY AND WEATHER IS OPTIMAL. SELECT LANDING SITE.'94'93I don'92t
know where to land yet,'94 said Jeff. '93I never really knew the
geography of this place. Uh, scan for a big pyramid with a flat top,
okay? And I mean a. big pyramid.'94'93SCANNING. THIS MAY REQUIRE A
PROLONGED PERIOD IN VERY LOW ORBIT, DEPENDING ON CLOUD
COVER.'94'93Whatever it takes.'94 Jeff leaned back and relaxed.This was
much better than his last arrival on this planet. That had been an
emergency crash-landing that had killed everyone else on board. He shook
his head to avoid the memories of that frantic descent.'93Computer,'94
he said aloud. '93While you'92re scanning, keep watch for humans. I'92m
looking for a couple of them. And as far as I know, they'92re the only
humans here.'94'93SCANNING MODIFIED.'94The ship computer was not fully
positronic, but it was efficient enough to accept Jeff'92s orders and
translate them into ship controls.He hoped that finding Derec, Ariel,
Mandelbrot, and Wolruf would not take too long. When he had left the
planet in the only functioning spacecraft it had'97a modified lifepod
that supported only one passenger'97he had promised to send help back if
he could. The craft had taken him to a space lane, and had remained
there, sending out a distress signal while keeping him alive.The ship
that had rescued him had been jumping from star to star back to Aurora,
and he had yet to reach Nexon, where he hoped to start college. This
rescue mission was an important matter of pride to him, since Derec and
Ariel and the robot medical team had saved his life. Then Derec and
Ariel had sent him away when each of them would have liked to use that
ship personally.He sighed and watched the screen. He expected most of
the problem to be in locating them. The Minneapolis was outfitted to
take them all back to Aurora together.'93PYRAMID LOCATED,'94 said the
computer. '93CLOSE-UP ON SCREEN. PLEASE IDENTIFY.'94On the viewscreen,
the Compass Tower shone in the sunlight. The angle was from above, of
course, and a little to one side. At this distance, it looked like a
flawless model on a design display.'93That'92s it,'94 said Jeff
excitedly, sitting forward to look. '93Can you land near it somewhere
without smashing up anything?'94'93SCANNING FOR A LOW-RISK LANDING SITE
IN THE AREA,'94 said the computer. '93TO AVOID ALL CHANCE OF DAMAGE TO
MANUFACTURED AND CONSTRUCTED PROPERTY, THIS CRAFT REQUIRES MORE LANDING
SPACE THAN THE AREA HAS SO FAR OFFERED. '93'93Show me the area as you
scan it,'94 said Jeff. '93Just try to land as close as you
can.'94'93DISPLAYING.'94Jeff watched the screen closely as the view
pulled back to a greater height and began to move quickly across the
landscape. At first he tried to recognize other places, such as a city
plaza he remembered and the distinctive bronze dome of the Key Center.
He couldn'92t find them. Then, as the camera continued to scan, he
realized that they were covering a lot of area very quickly.'93Look for
an open grassy region,'94 he said. '93It was just outside the city.
I'92m sure it wasn'92t more than a few kilometers from that
tower.'94'93PERIMETER OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT NOT LOCATED. SCANNING
CONTINUES.'94He watched as block after block of city passed beneath
them. The robots had continued building, much faster than he had ever
imagined. He couldn'92t afford to land on the other side of the planet.
Derec and Ariel had lived close to the tower.'93Listen,'94 he said.
'93Most of this population is robots. If they'92re damaged, they can be
repaired. Just don'92t hit the buildings, '91cause we won'92t survive,
either.'94 He grinned at his own humor.'93CLARIFY.'94'93We have to land
around here somewhere. Try to avoid the robots, but give us priority.
Watch out for humans; other than that, find a place in the city near
that tower where we can land. A park, a plaza, a big intersection.
Something like that.'94'93SCANNING MODIFIED FOR MODERATE-RISK LANDING
SITE. SITE SELECTED.'94'93Good,'94 said Jeff. '93That was quick. See if
you can reach the city'92s central computer. Give it fair warning of our
landing site so it can tell everybody to get out of the way.'94'93LINK
ESTABLISHED. WARNING SENT AND ACKNOWLEDGED. CURRENT SPEED REQUIRES WIDE
TURN.PREPARE FOR LANDING IN APPROXIMATELY TWELVE MINUTES.'94Jeff
grinned. '93Good job.'94Eleven and a half minutes later, Jeff stared in
tense fascination at the screen as the small ship sliced through the
atmosphere at a low angle and came shooting straight toward the skyline.
The Minneapolis was versatile enough to act as both a shuttle and
starship, which was why he had chosen it. He trusted the computer, which
would not allow him to come to harm if it could help it, despite being
non-positronic...and yet even the computer couldn'92t prevent every
malfunction. After all, he had just barely survived one crash here.He
was gripping the sides of the chair and sweating freely as the screen
showed a broad boulevard stretching straight ahead. The ship was going
to land along the pavement'97did this thing have wheels? In a panic, he
couldn'92t remember.It must have; the computer wasn'91t stupid.The
streetfronts of a thousand buildings shot by in a blur, first below and
then on both sides. The ship touched down and streaked along the empty
street, suddenly decelerating sharply.Everyone was out of the way; the
city'92s central computer had done its part. The boulevard was as flat
and straight as only a city of robots would construct. The ship came to
a halt.CHAPTER 9WELCOME BACKJeff lay back in the chair panting heavily,
with sweat running down his face and arms. That was a lot more
frightening than he had expected...but a lot better than last time. The
ship computer had been flawless.Next time, he'92d shut off that stupid
viewscreen. Who needed to see that, anyhow?'93LANDING COMPLETED,'94 said
the computer cheerfully.'93Shut up,'94 Jeff muttered.He didn'92t want to
stay in this can. Shakily, he got up and moved to the door. '93Exit
access,'94 he instructed.The door unlatched and opened. A flexible
ladder extended from it. Jeff held the sides of the ladder firmly,
turned, and climbed down.On the street, he drew in a deep breath and
looked around. It was Robot City, all right; it had the slidewalks, the
tunnel stops, the clean, organized buildings and streets. On the other
hand, it was totally unfamiliar.A couple of humanoid robots were just
now coming into view ahead. The central computer would have removed the
alert, of course. He turned and looked behind him. A few more robots
appeared, riding the slidewalks along the side of the boulevard.The
nearest robot approaching him was remarkably tall and
full-chested.'93Excuse me,'94 said Jeff. '93I'92m in need of
assistance.'94The Hunter robot took him firmly by the upper arm.'93Hey!
Wait a minute. What are you doing?'94 He pulled back, but the robot
didn'92t let go.'93I am detaining you,'94 said the Hunter. '93You are in
custody and will remain so at least until you have been positively
identified.'94 It turned and began to walk.'93I'92m Jeff Leong. That'92s
no mystery.'94 He hurried alongside, walking awkwardly, almost
sideways.'93I am programmed to locate and detain two humans among the
four intruders known to be in Robot City. You will not be harmed.
However, you must come with me.'94'93And if I don'92t?'94 He demanded,
looking up at the robot'92s expressionless face.'93You will come
willingly or unwillingly. You will not be harmed. I prefer that you not
resist.'94The robot continued walking, dragging Jeff along with it. They
stepped onto a slidewalk and went on walking.'93Who are you looking
for?'94'93The two humans named Derec and Ariel,'94 said the Hunter
'94Also an alien robot named Mandelbrot and a small living creature of
undetermined type.'94'93Hold it. You think I'92m Derec? Is that it?'94
Jeff tried to pull back again, to no avail.'93I am instructed to take
you into custody pending identification,'94 said the Hunter
impassively.'93It'92s not necessary.'94 Jeff managed to turn enough so
he could walk straight ahead, at least. '93Look, other robots know me.
Contact the medical team. What was their name? Some kind of hospital. A
Human Medical Center, or something like that. They can tell you who I
am. Call them through the central computer.'94The robot did not
respond.'94Are you calling them?'94It still did not respond.'93Not
programmed for that, I suppose,'94 said Jeff. He sighed. '93Welcome back
to Robot City, Jeff.'94They walked along the moving slidewalk for quite
some time. Jeff'92s belongings were still stashed in the ship, of
course; he had intended to grab his personal luggage after getting
directions to Derec and Ariel. Resigned to a long and probably
frustrating interrogation by more robots, he marched along in step.A
certain amount of foot traffic and vehicular traffic went by, but Jeff
was sure that it was less than he remembered from his previous visit.
Somewhat belatedly, he was recalling just how many unexplained oddities
this city had had. Then, lost in thought, he was not paying particular
attention to the details around him until he heard a screech of tires
coming up right behind him.Jeff flinched and whirled around. The Hunter
holding him turned its head but did not break stride.A humanoid robot
was just leaping out of the cab of a large, halted
vehicle.'93Mandelbrot!'94 Jeff shouted. '93Tell this robot who I am,
will you? It thinks'97'94He was interrupted as the Hunter spun
completely around, at the same time yanking him to the side away from
Mandelbrot. The robot'92s hold on him did not loosen even for a
moment.'93You are harming the human,'94 said Mandelbrot to the Hunter,
in a remarkably unemotional voice. He stepped onto the slidewalk and
approached them.'93I am not harming him.'94 The Hunter'92s voice was
equally calm. It stood still.Jeff understood that Mandelbrot had spoken
aloud so that he could hear. Apparently Mandelbrot intended to rescue
him'97and that implied changes here in the city that were completely
beyond Jeff'92s expectations.Jeff let out as loud and intense a scream
as he could and dropped to his knees on the slidewalk, which was still
moving.The Hunter still had him by the arm.'93Release him!'94 Mandelbrot
shouted, striding forward and lifting Jeff in his own arms. '93Hunter,
you are inefficient! You are violating the First
Law!'94'93You...are...Mandelbrot...the fugitive robot,'94 the Hunter
said slowly. It was quivering slightly, its functioning impaired by the
uncertainty that it might have harmed Jeff. Yet it had not let
go.Mandelbrot gripped the wrist of the Hunter and gently held Jeff'92s
captive arm, as well. '93Release him,'94 he ordered again. '93I will
take him into custody.'94'93You...are...not...fooling me,'94 said the
Hunter. '93Step...away.'94Jeff could see that. The Hunter knew that
Mandelbrot himself was a fugitive from the central computer, so his
words were all suspect. However, the combination of his accusation and
Jeff'92s play-acting was enough to raise a reasonable doubt in its mind,
and the force of the First Law was so great that it was now hesitant to
act.'93Mandelbrot, carry me,'94 he pleaded, in as anxious a voice as he
could muster. '93He'92s hurt me.'94The Hunter was in trouble, but not
fully convinced. Mandelbrot did manage to force its grip open, however,
and remove Jeff'92s arm. Then he picked up Jeff around the waist, jumped
off the slidewalk onto the stationary shoulder, and ran for his
truck.'93Stop!'94 The Hunter moved to action the moment Jeff was free,
though it was still not at full capacity.Jeff was facing backward as
Mandelbrot ran with him, and could see the Hunter gradually entering a
slow run after them. The Hunter'92s instructions were still in
effect.'93It'92s already sent out a call for other Hunters,'94 said
Mandelbrot, still running. '93You will get an explanation at a safer
time. For now, when I hoist you into the back of this vehicle, lie down
and hang on. You will be safest that way.'94'93Uh'97okay'97'94 Jeff
complied as Mandelbrot jumped into the cab and drove off fast.Derec was
awakened from a deep sleep by the sound of the big door opening. Light
hit his closed eyelids and he reluctantly opened them with a squint. So
Mandelbrot was back. He took in a deep breath, hoping to wake up
completely and find food being offered.The vehicle entered the building
and then Ariel was already closing the door again.Mandelbrot turned in
the cab and helped another figure in the back to his feet.'93Say!'94
Ariel cried excitedly. '93Is that...that'92s Jeff!'94Amazed, Derec
forced himself up on one elbow. His back and shoulders ached
painfully.'93Hi, gang,'94 said Jeff. He stood looking around at them all
from the back of the truck. Then Mandelbrot lifted him down.'93Jeff,'94
said Derec. He grimaced as he sat up all the way. '93What the...what are
you doing here?'94He gave an embarrassed shrug. '93I came to get you. To
rescue you from Robot City.'94Derec felt his jaw drop open.Ariel clapped
both hands over her mouth.'93Ooooo,'94 said Wolruf.'93Oh, no.'94 Derec
rubbed his forehead, stifling an embarrassed smile of his own.'93What is
it?'94 Jeff asked, looking at them all one after another. '93What'92s
wrong? Don'92t you want to leave any more?'94'93Jeff.'94 Ariel went over
to him and gave him a hug. '93You actually came back for us. That'92s
wonderful. Please don'92t misunderstand. It really means a great deal.
Thank you.'94Jeff hugged her back lightly, clearly uncomfortable. '93I
don'92t get it. What'92s going on?'94'93Jeff,'94 said Derec. '93We can
get off the planet now if we want. In fact, we can travel pretty
far'97as far as Earth and back. We...I...have a different problem
now.'94'93You can travel now?'94'93I'92m afraid so,'94 said Derec.Jeff
looked at Ariel, who shrugged. Then he gave a short laugh, shaking his
head. '93Mind if I sit down?'94 He collapsed on the floor where he was,
not too far from Derec.'93I thought you were going to send someone else
back,'94 said Derec. '93I had no idea you'92d come yourself.'94'93How
did you find it?'94 Mandelbrot asked. '93If you remember, I had no
navigational data to give you.'94'93I had a computer cross-reference the
Aurora-Nexus route with what little I knew. It worked.'94 Jeff ran a
hand through his black hair, staring at the floor. '93I'92m a little
shocked. But I'92m glad you haven'92t been stranded.'94'93How did you
get here?'94 Derec asked.'93I was picked up by a ship headed back to
Aurora. Once I got back there, I put together the location where I was
picked up, the length of time it took me to get there, and the nearest
stars. A computer gave me the likely directions, but I had to try
several before I got the right one.'94 He shrugged. '93The hard part was
getting my father to spring for the rental of a ship. And now I have to
tell him it was unnecessary.'94'93Well....'94 Ariel started.Jeff turned
to look at her.'93We could still use some help;'92 she said. '93We have
to find Dr. Avery before his robots get ahold of us.'94'93Avery! Did you
say Dr. Avery?'94 Jeff sat up straight.'93You'92ve heard of him?'94
Ariel said, dropping down to sit next to him. '93Where?'94'93Mandelbrot,
Wolruf,'94 said Derec. '93Come closer and follow this. It may turn out
to be important.'94'93Well,'94 said Jeff. '93I tried to explain to my
father what I needed the ship for and he reminded me that this weird guy
named Avery once had some wild plans about a planet with a planned
community sort of like this one.'94'93Wait a minute! This was supposed
to be a secret,'94 said Ariel. '93My mother funded it. How does your
father know about it?'94'93He doesn'92t, really. It'92s just that Dr.
Avery gave away some hints when we met him.'94'93Met him?'94 Derec and
Ariel cried in unison.'93Look, I don'92t remember it very
well'97'94'93We'92ve all had a few memory problems,'94 Ariel said with
annoyance. '93Come on, this is important to us.'94'93When?'94 Derec
demanded. '93Recently? Back on Aurora?'94'93No, no, no. A long time ago.
A couple of years ago.'93Derec settled back. '93What happened?'94'93He
was still planning then, I bet,'94 said Ariel. '93Considering how fast
these robots work, that'92s plenty of time.'94'93He came to consult with
my father,'94 said Jeff. '93My father is a professor of Spacer cultural
studies. His specialty is tracing the development and evolution of the
various Spacer communities.'94'93What does that mean?'94 Derec
asked.'93They'92re comparative studies,'94 said Jeff. '93What planets
have in common and what they don'92t. How they'92re organized. How their
values differ. Stuff like that.'94'93Your father must be an expert in
that, huh?'94 Ariel said. '93That'92s why Avery sought him out.'94'93I
guess.'94 Jeff shrugged. '93Anyhow, a couple of years ago, this Dr.
Avery asked to consult informally with him. My father was real impressed
with the guy. He said Avery was an eccentric genius, and made me tag
along to meet him.'94'93What did he want to talk about?'94 Derec
asked.'93He was asking about social matrices,'94 said Jeff. '93In
particular, how my father would set up a utopia, if he
could.'94'93Utopia.'94 Derec exchanged a glance with Ariel. '93That'92s
how he viewed this experiment, isn'92t it?'94She nodded. '93Jeff. We can
use any clues you have to Avery'92s personality.'94'93I can tell you
what I remember. Why do you have to find him, anyway?'94'93He implanted
a kind of...well, sort of a disease in Derec that only he can remove. We
have to figure out where he is on the planet. Can you tell us what
he'92s like?'94'93I hate to tell you this, but I don'92t remember him
very well.'94 Jeff looked at all of them apologetically. '93I wasn'92t
that old, and I didn'92t really care about seeing him. I went because my
father wanted me to meet this genius. He said it would be a good
experience for me. The truth is, I didn'92t get much out of
it.'94'93Anything,'94 said Ariel. '93Just start talking. Maybe things
will come back to you.'94'93Well...my father had a very high regard for
him. More than usual. I mean, he'92s surrounded by very capable people
all the time. They were pretty friendly for a while.'94'93Then what?'94
Derec asked. '93Dr. Avery left Aurora, I suppose?'94Jeff shook his head.
'93Not right away. That is, he came and went for a time. My father had
some sort of falling out with him, I think, but I never bothered to ask
about it.'94'93Are you sure you don'92t know why they stopped being
friends?'94 Ariel asked. '93It might turn out to be important.'94'93I
think he was pretty egotistical. I got that impression right away. And
he was definitely eccentric. I guess my father just got tired of
listening to him.'94'93That fits my mother'92s description,'94 Ariel
said to Derec. '93Can we use that somehow?'94'93I don'92t know. We'92ve
all found dealing with him unpleasant.'94 Derec shrugged. '93Mandelbrot,
you can correlate data the best of us all. What do you think?'94'93We
have information about Robot City,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93And we have
information about Dr. Avery. However, we don'92t have the necessary
correlations to narrow the scope of his whereabouts.'94'93What about our
staying here?'94 Derec asked. '93Are we safer staying here longer, or
should we move?'94'93I only have a guess,'94 said the robot. '93I again
used an evasive route in returning here, but the fact that the truck
vanished from sight in the same general area as last time will narrow
the Hunters'92 scope considerably. On the other hand, traveling
somewhere else clearly provides more data to the central computer of our
whereabouts every time we are witnessed by any robot in the
city.'94Derec sighed and rubbed the stiff muscles in his legs. '93Thank
you for the lecture. What'92s your conclusion?'94'93We are better off
remaining here for the remainder of the day. At nightfall, travel will
be safer than staying here. These are both calculated risks, not
cert'97'94'93I understand,'94 said Derec. He gritted his teeth and lay
down again. Normally he wanted to know how Mandelbrot formed his
judgments because the robot'92s consistent logic could be informative.
Now he was just too tired and in too much pain for that.'93Maybe we
should all rest,'94 said Ariel. '93If we'92re going to go somewhere else
after dark.'94'93Good idea,'94 said Wolruf.Derec closed his eyes. He
heard Wolruf pad away, presumably to relax in a spot of her
choosing.'93I was planning to go out again to seek a food source,'94
said Mandelbrot, '93but I now consider it too risky. All of you can
remain healthy through the day without sustenance. When we travel at
night, we may find food in some way. Is this acceptable?'94'93Sure,'94
Derec muttered, without opening his eyes.'93All right,'94 said
Ariel.'93You know,'94 Jeff said slowly, '93I have plenty of supplies on
board the Minneapolis. I didn'92t realize food was a problem for you.
The only question is how to get it.'94'93I doubt it'92s a simple
question,'94 said Ariel. '93It must be well guarded by now.'94They could
have dismantled it by now, Derec thought, but he was too exhausted to
speak up.'93Perhaps we can look into this,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93Though
the risk is very high.'94'93How about a review of the whole
situation?'94 Jeff asked. '93I never did know the origin of this place.
Would you mind giving me the entire story? We apparently have the rest
of the day.'94'93You know, Jeff,'94 said Ariel, '93you really don'92t
have to get mixed up in this. If we can get you back on board your ship,
you can get out of here again.'94'93I'92m ready to help.'94'93I don'92t
think we can ask you to do that.'94 She lowered her voice. '93You
haven'92t heard what Dr. Avery has done to Derec.'94'93I'92m staying,'94
Jeff said firmly. '93I came here to repay a debt. Since you don'92t need
help getting off the planet anymore, I'92ll repay it with help you do
need.'94'93Maybe you should know what you'92re getting involved in
before you decide.'94'93Go ahead,'94 said Jeff. '93But I'92m staying,
period.'94Derec drifted off to sleep to the sound of Ariel'92s voice
recounting their story.CHAPTER 10THE MINNEAPOLISHe awoke again, much
later, as strong arms slid under him and lifted him. '93What'92s
happening?'94 His throat was rough and dry. He cleared it, opening his
eyes.Mandelbrot was carrying him to the back of the truck.'93Time to go,
huh?'94 Derec smiled weakly as he settled onto the truck bed.'93We'92re
all here,'94 said Ariel, next to him. '93Mandelbrot'92s in charge so
far. Ready?'94'93Sure. Where are we going?'94'93We'92re going after my
supplies,'94 said Jeff.'93What?'94 Derec struggled to sit up, looking at
them in surprise. '93That'92s a perfect trap. What'92s the plan?'94'93We
don'92t have one yet,'94 said Ariel. '93Mandelbrot couldn'92t get any
information about the ship through the central computer without giving
himself away, so we don'92t know what kind of security it has around it
or anything.'94'93I don'92t like this at all,'94 said Derec. He turned
to Mandelbrot, who was pushing the button on the wall to open the door.
'93Mandelbrot, this sounds like walking into a trap to me. Have you
considered that?'94'93Yes.'94 Mandelbrot hurried back to the cab of the
truck as the door began to open into a Robot City twilight.'93You have?
Then why are we doing this?'94'93The plan is flexible. All I intend to
do now is take an evasive route back to the landing site for
observation. We will not take unnecessary risks.'94'93Well...okay.'94
Derec sat back against the wall of the truck. If he could just feel
better, he could be more persuasive. Or help make plans. It was just so
hard to concentrate.The truck rolled out onto the empty street. The
robot population seemed to be getting thinner all the time. That was
good for his purposes, Derec thought, but the mysteries remained. What
was the purpose of the robot assembly points...and where was Dr.
Avery?Robot City had street lights, but they were not as bright or as
frequent as in other cities. The robots'92 superior vision made more
light unnecessary. The entire planet was a city of technological marvels
and striking robotic capabilities.'93What did Avery get from your
father?'94 Derec asked suddenly. '93He'92s called Professor Leong? What
have we seen in this city that Professor Leong provided?'94'93I
haven'92t seen anything like that,'94 said Jeff. '93He was talking about
culture. I'92ve seen science, technology, and architecture taken to new
heights, but that'92s all.'94'93The play,'94 said Ariel. '93We had the
robots do Hamlet here after you left. That is, Derec chose it but the
robots were ready for it. Some of them were involved with robot
creativity.'94'93The arts,'94 said Derec. '93Of course. And maybe a
system of ethics beyond the Laws of Robotics'97'94'93The Laws of
Humanics they used to talk about,'94 Ariel said excitedly. '93Some of
this crazy stuff is starting to make sense now.'94'93Instead of being
just oddities.'94 Derec nodded. '93Robots are too logical to leave a lot
of loose ends.'94'93Rrobot creativity,'94 said Wolruf. '93Came at ssame
time Dr. Averry returrned to Robot City.'94'93That'92s right,'94 said
Ariel. '93And now, after he'92s apparently reprogrammed all the robots,
there'92s no sign of it.'94'93The creative impulse caused too much
trouble,'94 said Derec. '93But originally, he programmed some artistic
abilities into his robots. Jeff, does this fit what you
remember?'94'93That'92s along the right line, yeah. And I remember now
that he had one interest in particular.'94'93Really? What was
it?'94'93Cultures that could endure.'94'93Endure,'94 said Derec. '93You
mean like republics and empires and so on? Dynasties and stuff like
that?'94Jeff shook his head in the darkening light as the truck slowed
for an intersection, then speeded up again. '93Cultures. They generally
outlast politics. They evolve in response to politics and economics and
technology, but they have lives of their own. My father called them the
sum of all the disciplines.'94The truck came to a halt, drawing their
attention. Derec looked out and saw that they had stopped on an
overpass. The bright twinkling lights of Robot City stretched in all
directions, implying the shapes of buildings and streets by their
patterns in swooping curves and mighty blocks and spiraling towers and a
fully reliable grid on the ground.'93Down there,'94 said Jeff.
'93That'92s the boulevard I landed on, running parallel with this one.
See between those buildings there?'94'93I see it,'94 said Ariel. '93Just
barely.'94'93I dare not take the truck any closer,'94 said Mandelbrot,
standing in the open cab to face them. '93I can approach it on foot and
survey the security measures.'94'93Hold it,'94 said Derec. '93If they
left it just sitting there, it has to be a trap. Mandelbrot, that means
they'92re ready for you, too, in some way. They wouldn'92t leave bait
like that just waiting to be flown away.'94'93Too bad we can'92t move
it,'94 said Jeff.'93Wait a minute,'94 said Ariel. '93Maybe Mandelbrot
can communicate with its computer.'94'93I doubt they left the ship
operational,'94 said Derec. '93That doesn'92t make sense,
either.'94'93Unless they'92re overconfident of their security
measures,'94 said Jeff. '93Mandelbrot, if you want to try, it'92s a
ten-passenger Hayashi-Smith named Minneapolis. It'92s non-positronic but
it'92s smart enough to handle the flight instructions I give it, which
are pretty general. That'92s about all I know about it.'94'93I am
currently trying standard frequencies,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93The
customary range is small. No response.'94'93Good,'94 said
Derec.'93What?'94 Ariel demanded.'93Maybe we have a chance after
all.'94'93What do you mean?'94 Jeff asked.'93If we'92re lucky, the only
way they disabled the ship was to disconnect the computer. Mandelbrot,
your comlink can send out the same impulses it did.'94'93I might be able
to start the ship,'94 said Mandelbrot, '93but I can'92t fly it from
here. The boulevard is too narrow and I'92m not familiar with the ship
itself. '93'93I can'92t '91elp '91u, eitherr,'94 said Wolruf
apologetically. '93Can navigate, but giving orrders to Mandelbrot takess
too long for shuttle takeoff. And '91ave no line of sight from herr,
eitherr.'94'93We don'92t have to fly it,'94 said Derec. '93The boulevard
goes straight. All we have to do is get it away from their security long
enough to get inside and grab the supplies.'94'93The robots would know
that,'94 said Jeff. '93Don'92t you think they must have accounted for
that somehow?'94'93Maybe,'94 said Derec. '93But remember how logical
this place is. The Hunters don'92t have much experience with devious
thinking.'94'93They were programmed by a paranoid,'94 Ariel pointed
out.'93It'92s worth a shot,'94 said Derec.'93I believe I can make it go
straight,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93I suggest, however, that we first take
the truck to the rendezvous site so that we are waiting when it arrives.
It will not take the Hunters long to catch up with it.'94Derec'92s heart
was pounding with excitement, and the adrenaline seemed to be loosening
up his muscles. He grinned. '93Let'92s go!'94Mandelbrot drove the truck
a much longer time than Derec had expected, but the distance he covered
made sense. The fifteen kilometers the ship would travel down the
boulevard to reach them was virtually nothing to it, even in its shuttle
mode. Mandelbrot pulled the truck into a side street and brought it
close to the intersection with the boulevard. Then he stopped the truck
and sat motionless.'93I guess he'92s concentrating,'94 said
Ariel.'93They ought to rename this street Minneapolis Boulevard,'94 said
Jeff, grinning. '93If this works, anyhow.'94Derec was tingling with
excitement. '93Wolruf, when you and Mandelbrot are both inside, you can
fly this thing, right?'94'93Rright.'93 A slash of street light cut
across her face as she gave a nod and a caninoid grin.'93Here it
comes,'94 said Jeff.A high, even whine was coming toward them in the
distance, growing louder as Derec listened. They sat motionless, unable
to see around the corner of the nearest building. Only Mandelbrot was
visible, and Derec watched his dark, motionless profile as the sound
grew louder.Soon the sound was almost deafening. The ship pulled into
view in the intersection, seeming to loom over them in the garish light
and deep shadows, both huge and wonderful. Then it stopped.Mandelbrot
stood up and turned to help Derec out of the truck. The others took it
as a signal to climb out themselves and run for the waiting
ship.Mandelbrot picked up Derec under one arm to save time by carrying
him. At the robot'92s command, the door opened ahead of them and the
ladder slid to the ground. Derec looked down the boulevard as Mandelbrot
ran with him.A crowd of robots was rushing toward them in the far
distance. Hunters were running along the moving slidewalks. Function
robots of various sizes and shapes were rolling and driving down the
boulevard. They constituted the surprise element of the trap, now
neutralized by the stealing of the bait.The function robots did not have
positronic brains to think with, but they could follow orders from the
Hunters to move in paths that would block or even ram the ship and the
truck. The fastest of them were coming on rapidly.Mandelbrot set Derec
down on the highest rung of the ladder that he could reach. Derec'92s
foot slipped on the ladder. As he clung to the ladder with another
nervous glance at the oncoming rush, he felt Mandelbrot take him under
his arms and lift him. Mandelbrot climbed the ladder, holding Derec up
until he could deposit him inside the ship. Jeff and Ariel pulled him to
one side as the robot entered last.Wolruf was already in the
navigator'92s seat looking at the override controls. The ladder
retracted and the door closed as Mandelbrot took the pilot'92s
seat.'93Straight on down boulevarrd,'94 said Wolruf. '93Space is enough
forr takeoff. '93Mandelbrot was reaching for the manual controls.
'93These will be safer than risking comlink control. Everyone, please
strap in.'94'93We'92re all strapped into seats,'94 said Jeff. '93I'92m
sure glad you can do this. All I can do is tell the computer what I
want.'94Just as the ship began to move forward, a heavy thump struck the
rear of the ship. The impact was faint but clearly noticeable.'93Damage
insignificant,'94 said Wolruf.The ship was picking up speed. Another
crash against the rear of the ship swayed it crookedly for a moment
before Mandelbrot brought it back into line. A horrible screeching sound
raked along the left side.'93They can'92t do much,'94 said Derec. '93The
First Law won'92t let the Hunters order anything that might cause a
crash. They must know by now they can'92t stop the ship without knocking
us out of control.'94'93Hope you'92re right,'94 Jeff said grimly, as
another thump shook the rear of the ship.That was the last one, however.
The ship had left the last of the function robots behind and was angling
steeply into the air.CHAPTER 11IN ORBIT'93I have chosen to go into a low
orbit,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93This ship does. not carry large amounts of
fuel for shuttle mode and it will be needed for landing here and also
for Jeff'92s eventual trip away from the planet. However, as long as we
are off the surface of the planet, we are safe from the robots of Robot
City.'94'93That'92s a relief,'94 said Derec. '93Unless they'92ve
developed a space program we don'92t know about.'94'93The navigational
sensorrs indicate no ssign of that,'94 said Wolruf. '93Suggesst I take
manual controls. Mandelbrot can reconnect ship
computerr.'94'93Agreed,'94 said Mandelbrot.'93The First Law won'92t let
them shoot us down or anything like that,'94 said Ariel. '93But they can
monitor us, can'92t they? And have a welcoming committee anywhere we
land?'94Mandelbrot now had a panel open by the controls and was studying
the interior. '93This craft is small and its shuttle mode offers high
maneuverability. We should be able to land with an evasive pattern that
will make our site unpredictable until the last few seconds.'94'93I'92m
glad to hear it,'94 said Jeff. '93This planet is never dull, is
it?'94'93No,'94 said Derec, '93but it hasn'92t always been this
dangerous, either. One time we had to solve a human murder, and another
time we had to solve the apparent murder of a robot. But it'92s only
recently that we'92ve been anyone'92s target.'94Jeff laughed. '93Last
time I was here, they took my brain out of my head and stuck it in a
robot. That struck me as dangerous.'94Ariel laughed. Derec grinned in
spite of the pain in his ribs when he started to laugh. Even Wolruf
glanced back over her shoulder with an amused look.'93I'92m glad
you'92re okay,'94 said Ariel. '93And thanks again for coming back, even
if it was under mistaken assumptions.'94Derec felt a twinge of jealousy
but said nothing. Now that the crisis was over, his body was stiffening
up rapidly again. He reclined in his seat and felt the adhesions
snapping in his back.'93I believe this connection is now sufficient,'94
said Mandelbrot. '93Jeff, will you test the
VoiceCommand?'94'93Hayashi-Smith Minneapolis ship computer,'94 said
Jeff. '93Please acknowledge.'94'93STANDING BY,'94 said the
computer.'93Can you assume flight duties?'94'93AFFIRMATIVE.'94'93Do so,
maintaining status quo.'94'93FLIGHT DUTY ASSUMED.'94'93Also record the
following voices into your VoiceCommand and prepare to follow any of
them.'94 Jeff nodded to the others.Each of them spoke in turn to the
computer.'93What'92s our next move?'94 Derec asked. '93We'92re safe for
the moment, but we aren'92t any closer to Dr. Avery, are we?'94'93We
know a little more about his aims for Robot City,'94 said Ariel.
'93Based on Professor Leong'92s knowledge of him.'94'93But we haven'92t
turned that into a clue to his location,'94 said Derec. '93Mandelbrot,
any ideas?'94'93One, Derec,'94 said the robot. '93Computer. Scan for any
sign of large-scale crop growth or organic chemical
stores.'94'93SCANNING,'94 said the computer.'93Dr. Avery'92s food source
may not be in a quantity or storage facility that we can locate from
here,'94 said Mandelbrot, with a humanlike shrug. '93It is only a
possibility.'94'93Are carbon compounds used for anything else here?'94
Jeff asked, looking around at everyone. '93Besides that hospital place I
was in, or whatever you called it.'94'93I'92m not sure,'94 said
Derec.'93We are safe in saying that the amounts are quite small,'94 said
Mandelbrot. '93In addition, the amount of food required for a single
human is small, as well. Our best hope of finding a source in quantity
is the chance that Dr. Avery may wish to extend his interest in culture
to the art of cuisine.'94'93Or at least, maybe he wants better food than
those chemical processors give you,'94 said Ariel. '93Fresh produce,
maybe.'94'93Hey! Speaking of which,'94 said Jeff, '93what did we grab
this ship for in the first place? Come on, let'92s eat. Ariel, the
compartment'92s next to you.'94Jeff distributed rations to everyone but
Mandelbrot, even locating some items Wolruf could tolerate.'93EXTENSIVE
AGRICULTURAL GROWTH LOCATED,'94 said the computer. '93COMING ON
SCREEN.'94'93Close-up,'94 ordered Mandelbrot. '93Identify if
possible.'94Everyone watched the screen. A tiny dark spot rapidly grew
into a green rectangle. That rectangle, a moment later, was clearly a
quilt of many different shades of green. On extreme close-up, the shapes
of the plants came clear.'93MANY CROPS ARE PRESENT. THEY INCLUDE CORN,
SORGHUM, WHEAT, AND BEETS. AT FIRST SCAN, AURORAN STRAINS OF
EARTH-NATIVE PLANTS PREDOMINATE. MANY CROPS ARE UNIDENTIFIABLE AT THIS
HEIGHT AND ANGLE.'94'93Maybe the robots bred some of them themselves;'92
said Ariel. '93Or they'92re native here.'94'93Pull back the view,'94
said Mandelbrot. '93Show the surrounding geography.'94The view drew back
to show the spine of a mountain range. It was geologically old,
exhibiting the gentle edges and curves of long erosion. The range was
fully forested but occasionally dotted with buildings. The agricultural
park was nestled in a high-altitude valley within the mountain range
itself.'93It'92s not city,'94 said Jeff. '93It'92s the first place
I'92ve seen since coming back that isn'92t all built up.'94'93Us,
too,'94 said Ariel.'93The robots are probably using the forests for
lumber and the slopes for industrial power or something,'94 said Derec.
'93They don'92t generally let anything go to waste. But those crops are
all food. I think this is it. Mandelbrot?'94'93The probability is
extremely high that this is a human food source. We must investigate it.
I remind everyone that Dr. Avery himself is not necessarily present.
'93'93It'92s a start,'94 said Jeff. '93Now what?'94'93First we must find
a place to land,'94 said Mandelbrot. '91These mountains are unsuitable.
Second, I suggest that Wolruf and I scout the location alone. Third, the
safest place for the rest of you to wait is in the air.'94'93Makes sense
to me,'94 said Jeff. '93You can use your comlink to reach us when
necessary, and we can fly this thing ourselves again now.'94'93Derec?'94
Ariel asked.'93Yeah, okay.'94 He shifted uncomfortably, angry that he
couldn'92t participate more. Still, this plan was simple
enough.'93Computer,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93Scan for landing sites as
close to the crop field as possible.'94'93CURRENTLY OUT OF VISUAL
RANGE,'94 said the computer. '93SCANNING WILL BEGIN WITH THE NEXT
ORBITAL PASS.'94'93We'92ll need multiple sites,'94 said Mandelbrot.
'91The Hunters will undoubtedly secure the first one after we'92ve used
it.'94'93Computer,'94 said Derec, with effort. '93Don'92t allow our
orbital route to give away our interest in that
area.'94'93ACKNOWLEDGED.'94Derec collapsed again. He wasn'92t sleepy,
but he was worn out. The short period of excitement had revitalized him,
but now he was paying the price.Everyone seemed to be unwinding from
their escape in the ship. Derec lay with his eyes closed and he heard
someone switch out the light directly over him. The darkness on his lids
was a relief.No one spoke for some time. Then, quietly, he heard the
computer again.'93NEAREST LANDING SITES TO AGRICULTURAL PARK COMING ON
SCREEN AS FOLLOWS: FIVE WITHIN FIVE-KILOMETER RADIUS; TWO MORE WITHIN
TEN KILOMETERS; THREE MORE WITHIN TWENTY KILOMETERS. '93'93Are any of
them in relatively uninhabited areas? Especially away from urban
streets?'94 Mandelbrot asked.'93DISPLAYING THE FIVE CLOSEST SITES. THESE
ARE THE ONLY SITES NOT USING CITY PAVEMENT.'94Derec forced his eyes
open. He hated feeling left out.'93It'92s an ocean,'94 said Jeff, in
surprise.'93A stretch of beach,'94 said Ariel.As they watched, five
separate areas of beach on the screen were colored lightly by the
computer.'93THESE SITES REPRESENT STRETCHES OF SAND LONG ENOUGH AND FIRM
ENOUGH FOR A SAFE LANDING,'94 said the computer.'93For the purpose of
evading the Hunters, this might as well be one landing site,'94 said
Mandelbrot. '93When they see the first, they will find the
others.'94'93We'92ll have to take the chance,'94 said Derec. '93We'92ll
drop off you and Wolruf as fast as we can and take off again. Then
we'92ll go back into orbit until we hear from you.'94'93Or until your
fuel level reaches minimum,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93I will alert the
computer to warn you when you must land.'94Derec closed his eyes
again.'93All right,'94 said Jeff.'93Computer,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93On
the next orbit, take an evasive route down to the first of the landing
sites. Avoid revealing our destination as long as you
can.'94'93ACKNOWLEDGED.'94Most of the next orbit was uneventful, but
Derec found the evasive maneuvers extremely unpleasant. The ship
descended, turned as sharply as it could, ascended again, turned again.
Each change shifted his weight and pressed his aching muscles. None of
the others seemed to notice.The changes began to include speed as the
ship worked its crooked way down toward the planet. Derec gripped the
strap holding him in both hands and clenched his teeth against the pain
shooting through his back. Finally the descent smoothed out and he
realized they were about to land.The ship landed on a surface that
listed somewhat to the left and halted so suddenly that everyone was
thrown forward against their restraining straps. The door opened
automatically and the ladder extended. Mandelbrot and Wolruf were ready
to go. Moments later, the door closed again and the ship waited briefly
for them to get a safe distance from the ship.'93PREPARED FOR LIFT-OFF
AS ORDERED,'94 said the computer. '93PLEASE INSTRUCT.'94'93Return to the
same altitude we just left,'94 said Jeff. '93Uh, use evasive pattern and
take a different orbit when we get there.'94'93ACKNOWLEDGED.'94The
acceleration pressed Derec back against his seat again. He closed his
eyes, resigned to the ride, and lay still.CHAPTER 12DESERTED
STREETSMandelbrot and Wolruf ran straight up the beach. The sand was
pale blue and packed hard all the way to the line where the ground cover
began. There they climbed up the dip between two high, rounded, grassy
dunes.'93Careful,'94 said Mandelbrot. '91The Hunters will be on their
way here already.'94Wolruf nodded.They moved cautiously over the next
rise and Mandelbrot found the edge of the urban area. The dunes were
bordered by a curving boulevard. Ahead of them, a smaller street
stretched away from them, lined with buildings on both sides.'93No one
is '91err,'94 said Wolruf.The streets were deserted in all
directions.'93We will be very easy to spot here,'94 said Mandelbrot.
'93I have no crowd to get lost in and you are now on the Hunters'92
list.'94'93Should move.'94Mandelbrot looked toward the mountains that
loomed over them slightly to the left. '93The valley itself is no
farther than five kilometers, but the mountains begin much closer. The
greatest danger to us is crossing the city to reach them.'94'93Greatest
danger to us iss waiting '91err,'94 said Wolruf.'93Agreed. Let'92s
go.'94 Mandelbrot started across the boulevard, striding at a pace that
was fast but dignified.No robots were visible in either direction. On
the first city block, they stayed near the edges of the buildings
themselves and glanced inside any doorways or windows that offered a
view. The city was functioning here without humanoid robots.'93Assembly
points,'94 said Wolruf. '93Robots '91err have already lefft.'94 She
glanced behind them, over her shoulder. '93 '91Unterss could come from
any direction.'94'93A tunnel stop would help us considerably,'94 said
Mandelbrot. '93If we stay on this street we will encounter one, if they
were built with the same frequency in this area as in the area we are
familiar with.'94 He paused to look inside a window. Inside, function
robots were scuttling about on their duties.'93Maybe they didn'92t build
any '91err at all,'94 said Wolruf as she trotted alongside to keep
up.'93That is possible. If this portion of the city is built on sand,
then tunneling is more difficult. However, these robots do not seem to
factor difficulty into their considerations.'94'93Therr,'94 Wolruf said
emphatically, pointing ahead.A humanoid robot was just disappearing from
sight around a corner ahead of them.Mandelbrot reached down to lift
Wolruf, and began to run'97not at full speed, but quickly enough to make
up some ground.'93Careful,'94 said Wolruf, clutching him around the
neck.'93I believe that a Hunter this close to us would have come in this
direction,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93However, I do not want to contact any
robot without the chance to observe the situation first. Pursuit is the
only recourse.'94A moment later, they turned the corner after the other
robot. He was now riding a slidewalk, standing still as it carried him
parallel to the mountain range. Mandelbrot hurried to the slidewalk and
then walked slowly after him once they were on it.'93I think I
understand,'94 he said quietly. '93Either this humanoid cannot be
replaced here by function robots, or else he is one of the last,
possibly the very last, in this area to follow his migration
programming.'94'93If that iss the case, we should forget about '91im,'94
said Wolruf. '93Go to the mountains and '91ide from '91unters. Find
Avery.'94'93We will be safer taking evasive action than simply racing
the Hunters to the mountains. In fact, we should avoid indicating to
them what our destination is, if possible. I am hoping to find a group
of humanoid robots to observe so that we can imitate their actions
without being witnessed by them.'94'93Too late,'94 said Wolruf, looking
back over his shoulder. '93 '91Err come '91unters.'94Mandelbrot turned
to look. One humanoid, clearly a Hunter by his size and sensors, was
riding a distant slidewalk toward the landing site.'93Good. They intend
to pick up our trail at the beach. That gives us a little more time.'94
Mandelbrot set Wolruf on her feet. '93I will try to manage among the
robots. See if you can reach the agricultural park. I will attempt to
meet you there.'94Wolruf hissed a kind of agreement and hopped off the
slidewalk. Then she darted away.Mandelbrot considered a number of
options for himself instantly and chose one. He sent a distress alert to
the robot ahead of him through his comlink.'93I am in need of
assistance,'94 he said.The other robot turned to face him, then stepped
onto the stationary shoulder to wait for Mandelbrot. '93What is
wrong?'94'93I am on the verge of physically shutting down.'94 That was
true; Mandelbrot neglected to say that it was voluntary. '93Please take
me to the nearest repair facility. Report me as a malfunctioned robot,
failure unknown.'94'93Agreed.'94Mandelbrot froze in place but kept his
positronic brain functioning. He had deliberately avoided identifying
himself.This robot was complying with Mandelbrot'92s request under a
subtle but real compulsion. The Third Law of Robotics required robots to
avoid harm to themselves through action or inaction but did not
specifically require them to keep other robots from harm. However, in
the robot society of Robot City, Mandelbrot had observed that such
cooperation was common. Perhaps it was even programmed. In any case, he
knew he could count on another robot'92s help, at least in the absence
of more pressing problems.The robot stepped back onto the slidewalk next
to him. Apparently the nearest repair facility was in this direction. At
least it would offer a kind of camouflage from the Hunters since he
would not just be wandering around by himself or, worse, with a highly
recognizable caninoid alien.He hoped Wolruf could make it to the
mountains. She was still of no interest to most robots, though they
could act as witnesses to her presence and her direction for the
Hunters. In the forested mountains she would have a better chance.At
present, the Hunters would almost certainly be tracking them by infrared
heat sensors. When they had followed Mandelbrot and Wolruf to the point
where they had mounted the slidewalk, they would ride it while scanning
the shoulder for the spot or spots where their quarry had gotten off
again. He rode on.Finally the other robot lifted him and stepped off the
slidewalk. This kept Mandelbrot'92s robot body heat off the ground; the
Hunters would not be able to detect where he had left the slidewalk.
However, they would be on Wolruf'92s trail without a problem.Wolruf
trotted down the empty sidewalk, alert on all sides for the sight,
sound, or scent of humanoid robots. The city here was as striking as
ever; she passed a gigantic, many-faceted dome glittering in the
sunshine, a spiraling jade-green skyscraper that resembled loosely
twisted ribbons frozen in midfall, and a multitude of combined
pyramidal, hexagonal, and conical shapes. The quiet hum of machinery and
the occasional function robots moving about told her that the city was
still active here.The absence of humanoids was eerie. The city was just
too big and elaborate to seem normal with deserted streets and nearly
vacant buildings. She felt exposed.Wolruf grinned to herself as she
turned corners, circled blocks, doubled back, and then moved on, always
working her way closer to the mountains that were so invitingly close.
As a navigator, she was no stranger to evasive maneuvers. She had not
usually conducted them on foot, however, or been limited to one
plane.She was not certain how successful these maneuvers would be. If
the Hunters possessed heat sensors that could consistently choose the
warmest trail, then she was not going to confuse them by crisscrossing
her path. Instead, she was just wasting time and letting them get
closer. After she had done a little more of that, she resorted to a
zigzag pattern that angled her toward the mountains more quickly.When
she reached the edge of the city, she stopped to consider her next move.
A long boulevard lined the base of the first foothill; beyond it, the
forest began. If she could disguise her point of entry into the
mountains, it would help her a great deal.She hopped onto the slidewalk
that ran down the side of the boulevard, looking around. The Hunters
could be right behind her or a long way back; she had no way of knowing
without risking them seeing her. She could be sure, however, that they
were coming with that inexorable robot logic and single-mindedness.Nor
could she ride here indefinitely; she could be seen easily by anyone
looking down the straightaway. She jumped off again.What she needed was
a mobile function robot she could ride across the boulevard, or anything
else that would keep moving after she left it, so that the traces of her
body heat would be carried away. With an anxious glance behind her, she
turned a corner and looked down the street.It was empty.Time was growing
short. She would either have to find a way to break her trail, or else
leave a track into the mountains that any Hunter could follow.She
started down the street, peering inside any windows she could
reach.'93ORBIT ATTAINED,'94 said the ship computer. '93PLEASE
INSTRUCT.'94'93Maintain altitude,'94 said Jeff. '93Vary the route at
random.'94'93ACKNOWLEDGED.'94Jeff turned to look at Derec. He was
reclining in his seat, eyes closed, jaw clenched. Jeff unstrapped and
moved over to him.'93What is it?'94 Ariel asked.'93These seats convert
into berths. If you'92ll unstrap him, I'92ll get the seat all the way
down flat. Then flexible privacy walls pull down from the ceiling.
'93'93I see.'94They worked in silence, watching Derec. He was clearly
awake, but in no mood to converse. When he was lying down comfortably,
Jeff pulled down the walls, leaving one open just enough for him to see
out if he wished.Jeff and Ariel sat down in the two control seats in the
front.'93Can we do anything for him?'94 Jeff asked.'93No,'94 Ariel
whispered.He looked at her in surprise.Her eyes were wide and staring at
the blank viewscreen on the console.'93Ariel? What'92s wrong?'94She
didn'92t respond.He took hold of her arm, gently, and moved his face in
front of her unwavering gaze. '93Ariel. Can you see me?'94Her eyes were
steady, open, and beginning to water.Jeff felt a tickle of fear along
the back of his neck. Ariel had told him something of the chemfets in
Derec and her memory loss and regrowth. However, he had had the
impression that she was getting much better. Now he was alone in orbit
with both of them and didn'92t know if he should try to help or what he
could do.'93Computer,'94 he said. '93Review landing sites. Skip the ones
on the beach. They'92ll be guarded.'94'93LANDING SITES COMING ON
SCREEN.'94'93Which one is the closest to the crops now?'94'93IT IS
MARKED IN BLUE.'94'93Can you describe it?'94'93IT IS A MAIN THOROUGHFARE
IN THIS PART OF THE CITY, STRAIGHT AND OF SUFFICIENT SIZE FOR A SAFE
LANDING. THE SHIP WILL HALT APPROXIMATELY 6.4 KILOMETERS FROM THE
AGRICULTURAL FIELD.'94'93What are the chances that Hunters will be
waiting for us when we get there?'94'93UNKNOWN, BUT VERY HIGH. THEY ARE
CERTAINLY IN THE AREA AND WILL SEE AND HEAR THE SHIP ON ITS FINAL
APPROACH. IF THEY ARE NOT WAITING, THEY WILL CONVERGE
QUICKLY.'94'93Faster than last time?'94'93DEFINITELY.'94Jeff looked at
Ariel again. She hadn'92t moved. Behind them, Derec seemed to be asleep.
Neither of them would run very far.CHAPTER 13INTO THE MOUNTAINSWolruf
had been trotting up and down the blocks, growing more frantic in her
search for a moving vehicle of some kind. Inside the buildings, most
machinery ran smoothly without even the presence of function robots.
Finally she spotted a small wheeled function robot rolling at a good
clip along a side street.She took off at a dead run for it. Oblivious to
her, it turned a corner and disappeared from sight. By the time she got
there, it had gained more distance on her and was angling across a wide
street. None of the slidewalks would take her that way.She was slowing
down, about to give up, when it abruptly changed direction toward a
doorway. The door opened automatically, timed so that the function robot
did not have to slow down at all. She forced herself to hurry on.Wolruf
was not in particularly good condition. Since joining Derec, she had
been starved on several occasions, overfed on others, injured,
and'97like all of them except Mandelbrot'97sometimes overworked and
stressed to her limit. She was now basically healthy, but she had not
had exercise like this for a long time.Then she saw the function robot
emerge from the doorway and zip across the boulevard again. It mounted a
slidewalk this time and actually came back toward her. Panting heavily,
she turned and ran for the slidewalk, angling toward a likely
intersection point with it as it rolled along the moving slidewalk.She
got a better look at it as she converged on it. It was only about a
meter square and two meters high. The wheels, as she had first
identified them, proved to be a bed of spheres that gave it the capacity
to alter direction without turning its body.The body of the little robot
was smooth and featureless. Wolruf had no chance of catching it if it
passed her again, considering how exhausted she was. As she closed with
it, she leaped, scrabbled for a hold, and managed to hang on.The robot
immediately slowed down. It did not stop, however, so she clung to its
body and rode. At least her body heat had left the stationary surfaces
on the ground. Now she had to catch her breath and hope this thing
didn'92t carry her right into the view of a Hunter.She realized that she
had no idea what this was programmed to do. From its size and what she
had seen, she guessed it was a courier of some sort, perhaps for small
parts and tools. That might account for its slowing down in response to
her weight, but not otherwise reacting. Right now, though, it was taking
her away from the mountains that she desperately wanted to
enter.Suddenly it moved onto the stationary shoulder, slowed down, and
came to a halt. She looked around, puzzled, and saw nothing. Then it
started across the street.She raised up and looked off to her side,
which was now the way they were going. A large Hunter robot was striding
down another slidewalk toward them. When it had seen her, it had
obviously instructed the function robot to move toward it.Wolruf jumped
off the function robot and ran the other way, turning the first corner
she reached. A slidewalk here would carry her in the direction she
wanted, so she mounted it and went into a trot. At the next corner, she
jumped off and turned another corner. The Hunter could move faster than
she could, and she was tiring rapidly even after her brief rest riding
the courier, or whatever that thing had been.She had only moments left
to think of something.With no other recourse, she headed straight for
the mountains, only a few blocks away. Another slidewalk would help,
though of course the Hunter could ride it, too. As the boulevard
bordering the foothills came into view, she looked behind her.The Hunter
was in full view and running down the moving slidewalk toward her.She
glanced quickly in both directions as she crossed the boulevard. The
street was empty as far as she could see on both sides. Then she was
across it, darting among the trunks of tall trees.She climbed the slope
as fast as she could, ducking under branches and dodging bushes. The
forest showed signs of the careful Robot City planning: The types of
trees and bushes varied with a certain regularity, as did their sizes.
Planting had been done with the long view in mind, both of harvesting
and of soil usage.As she bent low to pass under the arching branches of
a large bush shaped something like a simple water fountain, she realized
that she just might gain some ground here. Her size was a considerable
advantage in the close maze of growth. As far as she had seen, the
Hunters were uniformly among the tallest and bulkiest of the humanoid
robots.If only she could gain enough time to rest.Derec awakened in the
berth, at first puzzled by his surroundings. Then he remembered,
vaguely, that Jeff and Ariel had somehow reclined his seat into an
entirely flat position so that he could rest more comfortably. He lay
quietly for a while, staring at the ceiling.Thankfully, he had not
experienced any of those wild dreams in some time. Their weirdness was
frightening. Yet he felt worn out, even after sleeping.Maybe he had been
having those nightmares and not remembering them. The chemfets were
growing inside him like an organic parasite. Their symptoms also
evolved, like those of a disease. Not having those dreams, or at least
not remembering them, was yet another sign of how far beyond the early
stages his condition had advanced.He reached over to one of the screens
and sent it back up into the ceiling. When he rose up on one shoulder to
look around, he saw the silhouettes of Jeff and Ariel in the front of
the ship. They were turning around at the sound of the wall screens
moving.'93Derec?'94 Ariel said softly. '93How are you feeling?'94He
cleared his throat and swung his legs over the side of the bed, hiding
the pains in all his muscles.'93Derec?'94 She repeated, moving to
him.'93A little better,'94 said Derec. He started to stand, then decided
not to take the risk of falling.'93I had one of my...memory fugues
again.'94'93Really? How bad was it?'94 He looked up at her in surprise.
'93You haven'92t had one for some time.'94'93I don'92t know how bad it
was.'94'93What?'94'93Jeff told me I was just staring at nothing. And I
don'92t remember it at all.'94'93Maybe you phased back to the time
before I had your new memory developing again. Right into that empty
period. Anyhow, it'92s over.'94 He sighed. '93As for me, my symptoms
have been...changing.'94She looked at him without speaking.Derec knew
she understood that meant he was getting worse.'93We have to land,'94
said Jeff, joining them. '93I can'92t do anything for either one of you
if...if something happens again.'94'93Then you'92ve heard from
Mandelbrot?'94 Derec asked.'93No. We haven'92t. But our fuel is running
low.'94'93All we'92re using here is enough for life support,'94 said
Ariel.'93And for evasive changes in direction. Landing and takeoff will
also use a lot.'94 Derec nodded. '93All right. Do you have any plan of
action?'94'93Yeah, but it'92s not very good. Basically, we land on one
of the big boulevards the ship computer has identified as a site and
drive this thing to the edge of the mountains. Then we run for
it.'94'93I'92m...not going to be running very fast.'94Jeff nodded.'93And
the central computer can study our final approach and tell the Hunters
where we'92re likely to land.'94'93The Hunters will be waiting at the
landing site,'94 Ariel agreed. '93But we can gain some ground on them by
taxiing in the ship right to the foothills.'94'93And then?'94 Derec said
pointedly.Jeff and Ariel just looked at each other.'93All right,'94 said
Derec. '93We can'92t stay up here. We'92ll have to take our chances.
'93Wolruf darted under another of those thick, fountain-shaped bushes
and paused to rest. She had had two glimpses of her pursuit down the
slope; at least two Hunters were now behind her. Though her crooked path
had made calculating distance difficult, she did not think they had
gained ground on her.She continued to study the ground around her, as
she did when fleeing. Finally, here, she located what she had expected
to find all along. The robots were too efficient and well-organized to
cultivate a forest without them.A small metal stud protruded from the
ground in front of her. She studied it carefully, poking at it with her
stubby, sausagelike fingers. Then she began to look around in the dirt
again.A high-pitched whine caught her attention. It was faint at first,
but growing louder quickly, turning into a wail from the sky. Human ears
could not have heard it at this distance, but she could, and that meant
the robots easily could. She could not see upward clearly from the
forest floor, but the sound of the Minneapolis in shuttle mode was
unmistakable to her sensitive ears.She waited, quivering with tension.
As she listened, the ship obviously came to land safely somewhere in the
urban area. Then it grew so faint that she wasn'92t sure if it had
stopped or not. After a moment, it began to grow louder again.She
understood that the humans had decided to risk getting to the crop field
however they could. That meant she could help them, if the Hunters did
not come upon her too soon. She finally located a small rock in the dirt
around her and began striking it against the little metal post with
glancing blows.At first she couldn'92t hit it at the right angle. Then,
even after she had produced a few sparks, she found all of them flying
away from the metal. Eventually, however, one of the sparks fell back
onto the small metal post itself.Instantly, one of the highly sensitive
Robot City sensors responded to the heat by producing a fine spray of
water, no more than a meter high. Greater heat would undoubtedly have
triggered a stronger spray; however, this would be good enough for her
purposes. The sprinklers would dampen the ground behind her, eliminating
the body heat that the Hunters had been tracking.She looked around,
blinking against the spray. Other sprinklers near her had also been
triggered, as far as she could see. As always, these robots had designed
their system efficiently.The Minneapolis had come to a halt some
distance to her left, according to the sound, at the bottom of the
foothills. She wanted to join the humans again, but did not dare. They
could lose their pursuit now in the sprinkled area, but the Hunters
behind her were too close. She might just lead them right to the
others.She took a deep breath and darted away from the bush, looking for
rocks, roots, and other hard surfaces to step on. The Hunters could no
longer follow her heat, but they could see footprints. She ran on up the
slope, away from the crop field.As Wolruf had surmised, the Minneapolis
had landed safely at a site surrounded by Hunter robots and had
successfully driven through the crowd down the boulevard straight to the
base of the mountains. As soon as it had stopped, the door had opened
and the ladder had extended. Jeff and Ariel were helping Derec out the
door when he stopped on the top rung of the ladder.'93Hold it,'94 said
Derec. '93Ship computer!'94'93STANDING BY.'94'93You have a record of all
the Hunters who were waiting for us at the landing site just a minute
ago?'94'93AFFIRMATIVE. ALL ROBOTS PRESENT AT THE SITE WERE RECORDED ON
THE VIEWSCREEN TAPES.'94'93Chase them,'94 said Derec. '93As long as you
can do so without endangering the ship. Pursue them up and down any
boulevards big enough for you.'94'93CLARIFY. '93'93Make them think
you'92re going to run them down'97in fact, do so if you can. The Third
Law requires them to take care of themselves, so keep as many of them
distracted and out of the mountains as you can. Got it?'94 Derec
indulged in a grin'93ACKNOWLEDGED. '93'93Let'92s go.'94Jeff and Ariel
walked on each side of him, holding his arms draped over their shoulders
as they hurried awkwardly to the edge of the forested hills. All three
of them had to watch the ground right in front of them and each
other'92s feet just to keep from stumbling.'93This is insane,'94 Derec
said through his teeth. '93We can'92t even outrun an Auroran striped
hastifer. How are we going to get away from the Hunters this
way?'94'93Better than a crash landing with no fuel for shuttle mode,'94
panted Jeff.'93It'92s getting worse,'94 said Ariel. '93Yuck. I'92m
getting wet. It must be raining.'94Derec jerked his head up and looked
at the brush and trees around them. '93Really? No, it'92s not
raining....Look'97sprinklers!'94 He grinned.
'93Sprinklers!'94'93What'97'94 Ariel paused to edge around the trunk of
a tree, as she was still tangled in Derec'92s arm. '93What are you so
happy about?'94'93The Hunters have been using heat sensors to track us.
We have a chance now.'94'93Mud,'94 said Jeff. He turned his head to one
side and ducked under a branch. '93That'92s our next problem. We have to
watch our footsteps or they'92ll just follow those.'94Derec pulled his
arm free from Ariel. '93And I'92ve got some adrenaline flowing again.
I'92m loosening up. Come on'97as long as I'92m really worked up, I can
move.'94 He pulled away from Jeff, too, trying to hide the extreme pains
he still felt.Jeff studied his face. '93Whatever you say. But if you
really need help, say so, all right?'94'93Yeah, yeah. Come on.'94Jeff
led the way up the slope. The forest grew thicker very quickly and then
remained almost uniformly the same, probably the result of precise robot
planting. Derec followed him, straining not to show how much difficulty
he was having. Still, Jeff tended to gain on him, while Ariel was always
moving up right behind him.As Derec struggled on, one fact kept
returning to his thoughts. Dr. Avery had done this to him'97and Derec
had never done anything to him. His anger served to fire him, to keep
him moving, to force him onward. Dr. Avery would not escape.Jeff stepped
onto a ridge of white rock and stopped, breathing hard. Derec came up
and joined him, but collapsed into a sitting position. Ariel stood next
to him.'93That agricultural park, or whatever you want to call it, is
that way,'94 said Jeff, nodding at an angle over the mountains.
'93According to the viewscreen, there are passes on each side of
us.'94Derec looked up at him, but was too out of breath to speak. He
just nodded.'93It looks like these rocks extend across this foothill for
some distance,'94 Jeff went on. '93They'92ll take us toward either pass.
I think we should stay on this ridge for as long as we can to avoid
leaving footprints.'93'93Maybe the ship really slowed down a few
Hunters,'94 Ariel said when she had the breath.'93We can hope so,'94
said Jeff. '93But we'92d better get going.'94Derec struggled to get up.
'93Okay,'94 he said huskily.They started again, more slowly this
time.CHAPTER 14THE AGRICULTURAL PARKTwilight had fallen on the mountain
pass by the time Derec plodded after Jeff and Ariel to its far side.
They waited for him to catch up and he leaned an arm across Ariel'92s
shoulders when he arrived. Together, the three of them looked out over
the green valley below.The valley was divided into many different
fields, all of them tended by function robots. The hoes were easily
identified, even at this great distance. There were others moving about,
some clipping and spraying. The lower slopes leading into the valley
were terraced and cultivated, also.'93This has to be the place,'94 said
Derec. '93Robots just don'92t need this stuff.'94'93I agree,'94 said
Jeff. '93This is Avery'92s grocery store. Or at least, his produce
market. If he has livestock, they must be somewhere else.'94'93They
would require different care and processing. '93 Derec nodded. '93And
these robots are too efficient to put this here and Avery a thousand
kilometers away. I'92m betting he'92s in the neighborhood,
someplace.'94'93And we made it,'94 said Ariel. '93This far,
anyway.'94'93We couldn'92t help leaving a few footprints here and
there,'94 said Jeff. '93And those Hunter robots may have sensors I
can'92t even imagine. They don'92t have to stop for the night,
either.'94'93They'92ll spot all kinds of details we left behind,'94 said
Derec. '93Broken branches and things like that. As much as I hate to say
this...we'92d better move on.'94'93Some of them probably went to the
other pass,'94 Ariel pointed out. '93There won'92t be as many behind
us.'94'93That pass leads to this valley, too,'94 said Jeff. '93We might
just meet them coming the other way.'94Ariel shook her head. '93You'92re
so optimistic. Come on.'94They started down the slope and soon entered
the cultivated rows of some plant that none of them could identify. It
grew in a straight stalk with stiff, narrow leaves angling sharply
upward, roughly three meters high. The stalks were planted close
together, forcing them to walk in single file between the rows.Jeff
looked back over his shoulder nervously. '93We'92re leaving a track even
I could follow. Look down.'94Derec looked. The soil was freshly turned
and damp. Their footprints were clear and deep. '93These robots must hoe
and water constantly.'94'93It hasn'92t gotten any darker,'94 said Ariel.
She looked up at the sky. '93It should have by now.'94'93Lights must
have come on,'94 Derec said. '93I can'92t tell from where, though. The
function robots here may need some to work at night. Or else this is
growth light of some kind for the crops.'94Jeff was pushing
experimentally between two stalks in one of the rows. '93Come on. We can
squeeze between these. We have to break up our trail a little.'94The
others followed him through. The next row was identical to the previous
one as far as Derec could see. They walked down it for a while, then
found another spot where they could push through into the next row down
into the valley.'93Up there,'94 said Derec, pointing. '93We have to
catch it. Come on!'94Some distance ahead, a function robot was moving
away from them at a moderate speed. The body of this robot was roughly a
cube two meters on a side. It seemed to advance on a bed of vertical
spikes that chewed into the ground as it walked forward, thereby hoeing
the soil it covered. At intervals, it stopped and sent tentacles out to
each side that stabbed into the earth in the rows of crops and pulled
out small plants into its own body.Jeff ran for it. As Ariel tried to
help Derec along, he glanced at the rows of crops as they passed.
Apparently that stabbing motion cut the roots of unwanted plants that
had grown up between the desired crops. The weeds were drawn into the
function robot, ground up, and deposited through the bottom to be left
behind as instant compost. He could see the tiny bits here and there in
the soil now that he was looking.'93I got it but I don'92t see any way
to stop it,'94 Jeff called. He was now sitting on the body of the hoer,
facing backward.'93Stupid thing,'94 said Ariel. '93I wish it had a
positronic brain so we could order it around.'94'93No,'94 said Derec,
struggling after her. '93It could also report to the Hunters, in that
case.'94The hoer would not wait for them, but every time it stopped to
weed they gained on it a little. At last they were able to climb on
board with Jeff, where they sat awkwardly on its crowded top.'93Now we
just need some luck,'94 said Jeff. '93If this thing stays out of the
sight of the Hunters until it takes a few turns here and there, they
won'92t be able to track us easily after all. All the rows have the same
appearance after these things go through them.'94'93I can use the
rest,'94 said Derec. '93But we have to figure out where Avery is while
we can. I didn'92t see any buildings in this valley when we came
in.'94'93I didn'92t either,'94 said Jeff, shaking his head.'93Then what
else do you remember?'94 Ariel asked. '93From your father?
Anything.'94'93I thought about it while we were climbing up the
mountain,'94 said Jeff. '93But I didn'92t have breath to talk. You
remember how I told you that Avery wanted to know about cultures that
could endure?'94Ariel nodded. Derec was alert but too tired to
respond.'93My father told him that two groups exist even now, in space,
that are descended in a straight line from ancient Earth. Both of them
have continued to evolve in Spacer communities, but their longevity
really got Avery'92s attention.'94'93What were they?'94 Ariel
asked.'93One is the Spacer minority culture descended from China through
a couple of migrations on Earth. The other is the Spacer Jewish
communities.'94'93What did he want to know about them?'94 Ariel made a
face. '93I don'92t see how this is going to help us find him
here.'94Jeff shrugged. '93I do recall that he didn'92t care about their
details. My father tried to tell him that both these cultures had
continued to evolve in space. He even said that in many ways they were
totally unrecognizable from their ancestral Earth cultures. But all
Avery wanted to know was how they had survived as specific
entities.'94That was consistent, Derec thought to himself. The guy only
cared about his own project and what he could do to improve it.'93He was
looking for clues for Robot City,'94 Ariel said. '93To make it endure
across the centuries. That'92s what he was researching with Professor
Leong. He needed to program cultural values into the city. But we
haven'92t really seen very much of that.'94Derec forced himself to
speak. '93I'92m sure that he reprogrammed the city while we were on
Earth. I think after the incidents surrounding the performance of
Hamlet, the robot creativity scared him. He couldn'92t have his robots
committing crimes against each other.'94'93The arts aren'92t the only
part of culture,'94 said Jeff.'93What do you mean?'94 Ariel asked.Derec
shifted slightly so that he could hear Jeff better. The hoer moved right
along, still hoeing and weeding. The sky above them now looked dark, but
a soft glow of light from somewhere illuminated the rows of crops.'93My
father gave Avery two reasons for the cultural survival of those groups
while they were on Earth. One is that the original cultures had very
strong family units that passed values on. The other is that, outside of
their native countries, both groups on Earth experienced limited
assimilation as minorities and often faced prejudice from the majority
culture.'94'93But only on Earth?'94 Ariel said.'93That'92s right. Modem
Spacer families aren'92t personally close the way families used to be, I
guess. And now the ethnicities are from one planet to another, or Spacer
versus Earth.'94'93My mother didn'92t like Solarians,'94 said Ariel.
'93They program their robots funny or something.'94 She smiled. '93She
told me a joke once that went'97'94'93How could Avery have used that
information?'94 Derec asked firmly, stopping her with a hand on her
arm.'93Come to think of it,'94 said Ariel, '93how can these minorities
still exist if the original reasons for their endurance no longer do?
That doesn'92t make sense.'94'93I'92m not sure,'94 said Jeff. '93But on
Aurora, I still look different. That always kept me distinct. And, you
know, my father took more interest in me than my friends'92 fathers.
That'92s why he dragged me out to meet Avery, remember?'94'93I think I
see,'94 said Ariel. '93Maybe some of these tendencies still exist to a
degree.'94'93At least in comparison to the majority cultures on the
planet.'94 Jeff nodded.They all clutched for a hold on the hoer as it
reached a perpendicular row and made a right-angle turn without slowing
down. It made another right turn at the next row and started down the
direction it had just come on the previous one. They could see a long
way ahead of them.So could the Hunters, if they looked down the right
row.Derec was uncomfortable with this talk of families and fathers and
sons. He hadn'92t had any family to speak of since he had awakened with
amnesia.'93We still have to find Avery in this valley or this mountain
range or somewhere,'94 said Derec with annoyance. '93What are we going
to do about that?'94'93Just one more thing,'94 said Jeff. '93My father
told Avery that two major events changed both these cultures in ancient
times. One was moving from the so-called Old World of Earth to the
United States.'94'93What difference would that make?'94 Ariel asked.
'93They were still on Earth.'94'93He said that while prejudice didn'92t
vanish there, these two cultures were part of a nation of immigrants and
their descendants for the first time. They were a fundamental part of
these societies even while maintaining their identities.'94'93What was
the other event?'94 She asked.'93Going into space. The same situation
occurred again with the settling of Spacer worlds. Being an Auroran,
say, is now more important than one'92s Earth ancestors. As demonstrated
by your mother'92s attitude toward Solarians.'94Ariel nodded
thoughtfully.'93So what does all this get us?'94 Derec demanded.
'93Robots never did have this kind of identity, anyhow. What does this
have to do with Robot City? And finding Dr. Avery?'94'93Now, look!'94
Jeff whirled on him. '93You'92re the one who started asking me what I
remember. I'92m just telling you. If you don'92t want to hear it,
don'92t ask me.'94Ariel grabbed both their arms. '93Robots,'94 she
whispered.Far in the distance ahead of them, the silhouettes of humanoid
robots were moving from right to left, down the valley slope, across
their open row.Wolruf gathered her legs under her and leaped from a
small rock to a fallen branch large enough to hold her. She landed on it
on all fours and hung on till she got her balance. This forest had very
few fallen branches, or loose matter of any kind.The robots obviously
cleared the forest floor frequently. She had seen a few function robots
in the distance but had kept clear of them. She didn'92t want the
Hunters sending any more orders to function robots that would help them
capture her.Still, she had managed to minimize the footprints she left
behind. A fairly small area had been sprinkled by the sensor she had
triggered and she had left it before the sprinklers quit operating. She
wondered how long they had continued to run.She hoped they had remained
on for some time. If they had sprayed long enough, then the water
eventually would not only have eliminated the body heat of her
footprints on the ground, but also would have washed away the visual
traces.That and the difficulty the big Hunters would have in moving
through the crowded forest might account for their falling behind. When
they had lost her trail, they probably would have had to resort to a
pattern search to pick it up again, and that would cost them time.She
stayed on the branch to catch her breath. Her memory of the terrain on
the ship viewscreen was clear enough, but she wasn'92t sure exactly
where she was. Nor was she sure of what to do.So far, she had been
angling up the slope and away from the pass that the humans had been
near, certain that they were heading there. Anything she could do to
draw Hunters away from them would be a contribution. She also remembered
that another pass led into the valley somewhere in this direction.She
was torn between two impulses, with no way to know which would better
serve the cause of Derec'92s getting to Avery before Avery'92s robots
got to him. If she got to the pass and joined the humans, they could
work together as a team again and perhaps accomplish more. However, that
would mean leading the Hunters following her right back toward them
again.This was not getting her anywhere.She could not afford to rest
anywhere too long, even now. After balancing along the fallen branch as
far as she could, she jumped off to a patch of ground that looked firm.
From there, she stepped on the top of an exposed tree root, grabbed a
low-hanging branch, and swung over to a small rock.Then she paused to
look back, wondering if this was worth the effort. If the Hunters came
up quickly, their heat sensors would tell them where she had been. Now,
however, she was hoping that they were too far behind to use those
sensors effectively. If the traces of her body heat subsided before they
arrived, minimizing her visual track could be critical.She continued to
move along this way. It was a gamble, but probably worth it. If she
could actually lose the Hunters, then she could look for the humans in
the valley without endangering them further. In order to know, however,
she would have to double back at some point and actually watch the
Hunters in action.That might be too risky. Still undecided, she fled on
up the slope, still moving roughly in the direction of the pass. Once
she got there, she could make her final decision on whether to enter it
or not.CHAPTER 15MUGGINGSSince the hoer was moving down the row toward
the humanoid robots, its passengers had no choice but to get off and go
the other way. Derec was surprised that the robots had not looked down
the row already and spotted them, but apparently they had not. As
before, he followed Jeff and preceded Ariel, all three of them now
crawling along the damp earth so that the body of the hoer would block
them from view.Before long, they reached the perpendicular row they had
seen a short time before. It ran parallel with the one the humanoid
robots were taking in single file to go farther down into the valley.
Derec stopped there, breathing hard, unable to go on.'93Derec?'94 Ariel
crawled up beside him. '93Jeff, wait.'94Jeff looked back over his
shoulder and then came back. He watched Derec for a minute and shook his
head. '93I don'92t know what to do. We can'92t just stop.'94Derec
coughed and shook his head in frustration. He wanted to speak and
didn'92t have the breath for it yet. Quickly, he pointed in a stabbing
motion in the direction of the humanoids.Ariel turned to look. '93They
aren'92t coming yet. At least, I don'92t see anybody.'94'93No,'94 Derec
wheezed. '93That'92s not what I mean.'94 He paused again, still
breathing hard. His head was spinning dizzily.'93We could try supporting
you between us again,'94 said Jeff. '93But we can only do that by
standing up and walking.'94'93Wait, wait.'94 Derec inhaled deeply and
looked up at both of them. '93Those aren'92t Hunters. I'92m sure of
it.'94'93Really?'94 Ariel scooted closer to him. '93Derec, are you sure?
You'92re not exactly in the best condition.'94'93Hunters wouldn'92t just
pass by like that without even looking down the row. They can'92t be
Hunters. '93'93Makes sense to me,'94 said Jeff slowly. '93So who are
they, then? And what are they doing in this valley?'94'93I was thinking
about that, too,'94 said Derec. '93I think they'92re migrating.
They'92re following that mysterious migration programming we told you we
heard about.'94'93So the only danger from them,'94 said Jeff, '93is that
if they notice us, the Hunters can ask them where we were. Otherwise
they won'92t bother us?'94'93That'92s right,'94 said Derec. '93But we
can also find out where they'92re going'97where their assembly point is.
And what this whole operation is for.'94'93Now?'94 Ariel said, making a
face. '93Derec, we don'92t have much time left to find Avery. We can'92t
just go wandering off'97'94'93No! Don'92t you understand? This migration
thing is Avery'92s doing. If we can figure it out, maybe we'92ll find
him. He'92s behind it all, and it'92s obviously very important to
him.'94'93That sounds awfully risky,'94 said Jeff.'93Look at me! Risky?
I don'92t have much time left!'94 Derec spoke forcefully, but was too
weak to speak loudly now. '93I think we'92ve talked long enough. What
are we going to do?'94'93That row is full of robot footsteps, too,'94
said Ariel. '93Ours would be camouflaged some.'94'93It is something to
go on,'94 Jeff said slowly.'93I wish Mandelbrot was here,'94 said Ariel.
'93And poor Wolruf, running around in Robot City with him. I wonder
where they are. I hope they'92re all right.'94'93We can'92t worry about
them,'94 said Derec. '93We can'92t help them directly now, anyway. If we
get to Avery, we can make him ease up on them, too. We have to
concentrate on Avery.'94'93That'92s right,'94 said Jeff. '93The truth
is, they can probably take care of themselves better then we can,
especially Mandelbrot. And Derec seems to be the one Dr. Avery is
after.'94'93I'92ve been putting some ideas together,'94 said Derec.
'93While we were crawling in the mud back there, just now.'94'93All
right,'94 said Jeff, '93let'92s hear '91em. If they aren'92t going to
come after us, we have a few minutes.'94'93Unless the Hunters get here
too,'94 added Ariel.'93Listen,'94 said Derec...Avery learned from
Professor Leong that the two most important forces behind cultural
longevity are passing on values and maintaining a distinct identity.
Right?'94'93Sure,'94 said Jeff.'93So passing values down is not a
problem with robots; they'92re just programmed. They can process
information much faster and keep more of it accessible than
humans.'94'93No argument there,'94 said Jeff.Ariel nodded. '93And all
along, we'92ve seen that these Avery robots are different from any other
sort. They behave in a different way. Their programming must have been
special from the beginning.'94'93Exactly,'94 said Derec. '93Both of
those facts fit perfectly. And the isolation of Robot City prevents it
from being altered by cultures from the outside. '93Jeff nodded. '93Its
location is still a secret.'94'93So Avery really took those two lessons
to heart and used them to form Robot City,'94 said Ariel.'93One big
question remains,'94 said Derec. '93What values did he program into
them?'94'93Efficiency,'94 said Jeff.'93Harmony,'94 said Ariel. '93Both
of those. A kind of idealism. Remember when they gave us their
provisional Laws of Humanics, for ideal human behavior? Robot City was
supposed to be a kind of utopia. We already knew that.'94'93But now we
know what kind'97on what basis.'94 Derec nodded with excitement. He now
felt a surge of energy again that animated him once more.'93I'92m
starting to get the idea,'94 said Jeff. '93What do you want to do about
it?'94,'93Challenge the system,'94 said Derec. '93Force it to
malfunction. or at least make it look like it is.'94'93To make Avery
show himself,'94 Ariel said. '93All right. I get it. But '85
how?'94'93We have to present the system'97that is, the central
computer'97with irrational events,'94 said Derec. '93Look'97the
Supervisors originally needed us to solve a crime against a human when
we first arrived. The system here has that weak point.'94'93And we never
did figure out who the victim was, either,'94 said Ariel. She shivered.
'93He looked just like you. That still gives me the creeps, even
now.'94Derec said nothing. When he had first entered Avery'92s office he
had come across some mysterious information about the dead man that he
had never shared with Ariel. This was no time to launch into that
topic.Jeff looked at her in surprise. They had never told him that part
of their story.'93Well, for the moment, forget it,'94 said Derec
sharply. '93One crisis at a time. The reason we arranged the Hamlet
performance was also to accomplish something that the robots weren'92t
ready to handle.'94'93I see what you'92re getting at,'94 said Jeff.
'93That'92s a weak point in the system. A utopia isn'92t supposed to
have crimes and these Avery robots can'92t really handle
them.'94'93Exactly,'94 said Derec. '93I think we have to commit a few
crimes against humanoid robots. We aren'92t bound by the Laws of
Robotics and Mandelbrot isn'92t around to interfere if a situation arose
that involved the Laws.'94Jeff grinned wryly. '93Okay...let'92s become
criminals. What'92ll we do first, boss?'94Derec grinned himself, despite
his discomfort. '93We have to incapacitate a robot. '93'93Murder one?'94
Ariel shook her head. '93I don'92t see how. Those heads of theirs are as
hard as a ship'92s hull. We could bonk them on the head and not even get
their attention.'94All three of them giggled nervously. The tension was
broken a little by the hope of taking aggressive action.'93We can'92t
unfasten their bodies, either,'94 said Jeff, still grinning. '93No
tools. Otherwise, we could just sneak up behind them, power up the
tools, and leave a little junkpile behind.'94'93We could go into
business later with used parts,'94 said Ariel. '93Discounted Avery robot
parts, cheap.'94'93All right, all right.'94 Derec shook his head. '93We
don'92t actually need any physical violence. The first thing we have to
do is get over to that other row, so we can look for one robot walking
alone. Let'92s crawl back over there.'94It was a very long crawl. Derec
had to stop several times on the way to rest. Each time, he worried that
the Hunters were going to catch up to them before they could accomplish
anything.Finally they reached the last few tall, leafy stalks before the
break in the rows. The three of them huddled at the corner of the row,
where Derec could lean forward and look up the slope. Jeff and Ariel sat
on his other side, both of them looking around anxiously for Hunters
coming from other directions.'93Nothing yet,'94 said Derec. '93That
gives me time to explain what I have in mind.'94'93I hope more are
coming this way,'94 said Ariel. '93What if the bunch going to that
assembly point is all there?'94'93Good point,'94 said Derec. '93Maybe we
should follow them. Just keep a look-out behind us'97'94'93No good,'94
said Jeff. '93These rows are absolutely straight. If the Hunters come
along, they can look straight down the slope and spot us instantly even
from the very opening of the pass.'94'93We'92d better stay here.'94
Ariel settled into a comfortable position. '93Derec, tell us what
you'92re planning while we have a chance to talk it over.'94'93You
mentioned their Laws of Humanics.'94 Derec nodded at Ariel.'93I don'92t
remember the exact wording, but their provisional First Law of Humanics
was to the effect that humans wouldn'92t injure another human or let one
come to harm through inaction.'94'93They just rewrote the First Law of
Robotics.'94 Jeff shrugged.'93The Second Law of Humanics might help
us,'94 said Derec. '93It says that humans must only give reasonable
orders to a robot and not require anything that would distress it. Their
Third Law of Humanics is the best one for us, though. It says that we
must not harm a robot or let one come to harm through inaction, unless
such harm is needed to help a human or allow a vital order to be carried
out.'94'93How do you want to use them?'94 Ariel asked.'93We need to
violate the Third Law of Humanics and maybe the Second to prove that
this isn'92t a utopia even for robots.'94 Derec looked at them both.
'93You follow me?'94'93So far,'94 said Jeff.'93How do we do that?'94
Ariel asked.'93Basically, we have to convince our victim that my
physical condition is his fault. '93'93All right.'94 Jeff nodded. '93In
other words, force it into shutting itself down because it thinks it has
violated the First Law. That makes sense to me. We have a better chance
of that than of wrestling it to the ground.'94'93How?'94 Ariel demanded.
'93They aren'92t exactly stupid. They'92ll know if they'92ve harmed you
or not.'94'93We'92ll have to play-act a scene,'94 said Derec. '93I
haven'92t really figured out the details. Maybe if it thinks it caused
you two to attack me, or something like that.'94'93I hear footsteps,'94
said Jeff.Derec got down low and carefully looked around the nearest
plant, up the slope. A lone humanoid robot was coming down the row.
Derec gathered his feet under him and waited.'93What are we supposed to
do?'94 Ariel whispered.'93We'92ll all have to improvise,'94 he whispered
back, gesturing with his hand. '93Quiet.'94Just as the robot reached
him, Derec threw himself forward to clutch at the robot'92s
legs.'93Stop!'94 Derec called hoarsely, looking up at the robot'92s
face. He didn'92t have to fake his pain any, but he gave vent to it in
his facial expression. '93You hurt me.'94The robot stopped, looking down
at him. '93If I did so, it was inadvertent. I apologize.'94 The robot
reached down to take Derec under its arms and lift him.At the contact,
Derec let out a scream and went limp. He slid out of the robot'92s grasp
to lie on the ground face up.'93You'92ve killed him!'94 Ariel screamed,
jumping up. '93You murderer, you'92ve killed him!'94Derec struggled not
to smile at her vehemence. He lay with his eyes open, so he could follow
what was happening.'93Looks that way,'94 said Jeff. '93Maybe you ought
to shut down, pal. You can'92t go around violating the First Law like
that.'94The robot was visibly quivering. '93I did not harm him. Our
contact was minimal and of very low impact. This is a misunderstanding.
I will help him find care.'94'93No! Don'92t you touch him!'94 Ariel
shouted, waving her arms wildly. '93You'92ll do it again.'94'93Humans
cannot die more than once,'94 said '91;he robot. '93Besides, he is not
dead.'94'93He'92s in very bad shape,'94 said Jeff. '93It'92s your fault.
Do you understand that?'94Derec started grimacing and writhing in pain,
with relatively little play-acting required.'93I...could...not have
harmed him,'94 the robot insisted. '93My contact...with him...would not
damage him.'94The robot'92s hesitation revealed his doubt. Derec was
encouraged. They just had to keep at it.'93And no reporting to the
central computer,'94 Jeff said suddenly. '93I almost forgot. You
haven'92t done that, have you?'94'93No...I was...distracted.'94'93Well,
don'92t. That'92s an order. Second Law. Got it?'94 Jeff demanded,
pointing a finger at him.'93Yes....'94'93Don'92t you think you ought to
shut down?'94 Ariel said forcefully, her hands on her hips. '93After
doing this to him?'94'93I am '85 not '85 convinced.'94'93If you won'92t
shut down,'94 said Jeff, '93then we'92ll have beat him up ourselves. And
that will definitely be your fault.'94'93That...is illogical.'94'93Are
you going to shut down or not?'94 Ariel demanded.'93No...I will
not....'94'93Wait a minute,'94 Derec wheezed, trying to sound as injured
as he could. '93Do you admit that you are in doubt about
this?'94'93Yes.'94'93Then you should at least agree to come with us
where we can discuss it further.'94'93That'92s right,'94 said Jeff.
'93You can'92t argue that, can you?'94'93Good idea,'94 said Ariel,
looking up the slope. '93We, uh, don'92t want to be
interrupted.'94'93Carry me,'94 Derec said to the robot. '93Who are you,
anyway? And what do you do?'94'93I...am Pei,'94 said the robot, with
somewhat less hesitation. '93My task is Architectural Designer.'94 He
bent down and gently picked up Derec. '93Where...shall we go?'94'93We
want to be out of sight of this row,'94 said Jeff. '93But not too far.
Uh, let'92s cross that row and go to the other side.'94'93Very well,'94
said Pei. '93However, we cannot go out of sight of this row unless we go
some distance. I see a slight dip in the row ahead that may suffice if
we all sit on the ground.'94'93Perfect,'94 said Ariel. '93C'92mon,
let'92s hurry.'94With Pei carrying Derec, the group moved quickly for
the first time since they had left the Minneapolis. As they walked,
Derec relaxed a little and closed his eyes. It was a relief to rest
again, even for a few moments before they stopped.Pei set him down with
extreme care. Then the others sat down around him on the damp, soft
soil.'93Explain...my transgression...of the First Law,'94 said Pei. He
began quivering a little more again.Derec, lying with eyes closed, felt
guilty about distressing the robot this way. He reminded himself,
however, that the same robot was under Avery programming. He would turn
them all in if the central computer or the Hunters knew he was with them
and instructed him to do so.Besides, he could be repaired or
reprogrammed later with no lasting damage.l can'92t, Derec thought. He
opened his eyes.'93You harmed me,'94 Derec asserted as firmly as he
could. '93Shut yourself down.'94'93At least for a while, you know, until
you can be checked,'94 said Ariel. '93That'92s standard procedure,
isn'92t it?'94Her phrasing sounded lame to Derec. He realized that she
felt guilty about this, too.'93I...must be...convinced,'94 said
Pei.CHAPTER 16TO CHALLENGE UTOPIADerec suddenly acted on another
impulse. With effort, he rolled onto his side and got his aching legs
under him. Then he launched himself at Jeff without warning, reaching
for Jeff'92s throat as if he wanted to strangle him.Just as he got his
hands around Jeff'92s neck, Pei gently grasped his wrists. Even at the
slight pressure, Derec screamed and fell back, drawing his arms away
with his hands limp. Then he collapsed to the ground with his eyes
closed.'93You did it again!'94 Jeff cried, not too loudly.'93You'92ve
really hurt him this time,'94 said Ariel.'93This is an acceptable
move,'94 said Pei. '93I have prevented greater harm to this human by
making a less harmful move to the one attacking him. No violation of the
First Law has been made.'94 His confidence was returning.Derec opened
his eyes, not otherwise moving.'93Uh....'94 Jeff looked helplessly at
Ariel.'93You overdid it,'94 said Ariel excitedly. '93Look at him.
That'92s not called for!'94'93That'92s right,'94 Jeff declared.
'93Stopping him with reasonable force is all right, but this is
something else!'94Pei looked down at Derec. '93I...could not...have hurt
him. I...was...gentle.'94'93Not gentle enough,'94 Ariel wailed.
'93That'92s twice you'92ve hurt him. You just don'92t understand how
fragile humans are.'94'93That'92s right,'94 said Jeff eagerly.
'93That'92s the problem. If you'92ve never had contact with humans
before, that explains it. Suppose you shut down till your judgement is
fixed up. Or something.'94 He shrugged lamely at Ariel.'93It'92s your
judgement,'94 Ariel agreed, '93that must be faulty at the core, so to
speak. You can'92t risk harming a human because of that, can
you?'94'93Perhaps...you have...a point.'94 Pei'92s voice grew faint and
he froze in place.'93Pei, are you awake?'94 Ariel asked
cautiously.'93Pei, if you can hear me, I order you to say so,'94 said
Jeff.When Derec didn'92t hear anything, he forced himself up on one
elbow. '93Hey, it finally worked.'94'93I guess it did,'94 said
Ariel.'93Then it should work again,'94 said Jeff. '93And now that we
know what it takes, we can refine our scenario.'94'93Let'92s get back
over to that row they'92re taking,'94 said Derec. '93Can you help me
up?'94Yet again, Jeff and Ariel helped him to his feet and supported his
arms over their shoulders. The trio shuffled back to the one row that
these humanoid robots were using for their trip down into the valley.
There Derec once more sank to the ground.Jeff and Ariel this time paced
nervously between the high stalks on each side of the furrow.'93Maybe we
ought to move on,'94 said Ariel. '93Isn'92t one mugged robot enough? I
mean, one murdered human and one murdered robot caused major crises in
Robot City before.'94'93That'92s a good point,'94 said Jeff. '93Maybe we
could drag him over here where the next migrating robot will be sure to
find him. But we could move on, keep ahead of the Hunters.'94'93I
can'92t help you drag him,'94 said Derec. '93And he'92s pretty big. I
doubt the two of you could get him all the way over here.'94Jeff ran a
hand through his straight black hair and sighed. '93You'92re right.
It'92s been a rough day already, and we may have a lot more running
ahead.'94'93One more robot,'94 said Derec. '93That'92s all we
need.'94'93What are you talking about?'94 Ariel demanded. '93If we just
stand here and wait for the Hunters, all this has been for nothing
anyway. We have to get out of here.'94'93Just one more robot. Instead of
mugging it, we'92ll just make sure it sees Pei, back there. Then we'92ll
move on.'94'93Well...all right,'94 said Ariel. '93We'92ll wait a little
while. But if nothing comes before long, we'92re leaving anyway.
Agreed?'94'93Fair enough,'94 said Derec. '93But remember, it has to be
one robot walking alone. I'92m pretty sure that trying to fool more than
one would be tougher because the others will observe and may spot the
fraud. Let'92s not chance that.'94More robots did walk down the row
before much time had passed, and all of them seemed to be migrating
alone in the sense that they were not part of a crew or a team. However,
they often came down the row in sight of one or more robots behind them,
and Derec did not dare attempt their charade under those
circumstances.'93Remember,'94 said Derec, '93not that much time has
really passed for the Hunters to get here. It just seems longer to us
than it has been because we'92re scared.'94'93Here comes another one,'94
said Ariel, peeking around the leafy stalk on the corner of the row.
'93It looks good. I don'92t see anyone behind him yet.'94Jeff moved next
to her to look. '93Hey, Derec. I think this is it. We'92ve got another
one.'94'93Finally. All right. Just before he gets here, I'92ll throw
myself on the ground and you jump on me.'94 He smiled wryly. '93Not too
hard, okay? I'92m half dead already.'94'93Derec, don'92t talk that
way'97'94 Ariel began.'93Hey'97wait a minute,'94 said Jeff. '93I know
that robot. It'92s...what did I name him? Oh, yeah. Hey, Can Head!'94
Jeff stepped out in front of the robot.The robot stopped suddenly,
looking at him in some surprise. '93Are you addressing me?'94'93Identify
yourself,'94 said Jeff.'93I am Energy Pack Maintenance Foreman 3928,'94
said the robot. '93I am following migration programming. Please allow me
to pass.'94'93That sounds right. I'92m sure it'92s you.'94 Jeff nodded,
studying the robot'92s eyeslit and general shape.'93Jeff, what are you
doing?'94 Derec asked.'93I knew this character,'94 said Jeff. '93I even
gave him a second name. He was very cooperative.'94'93They'92ve all been
reprogrammed,'94 Ariel said urgently. '93We'92re sure of it, remember?
He won'92t retain anything from when you were here before. Let'92s get
on with it.'94'93C'92mon, pal, remember?'94 Jeff grinned. '93You will
also answer to Can Head, won'92t you?'94'93Yes. I also answer to Can
Head.'94Ariel laughed in surprise, stifling it with a hand over her
mouth.'93There!'94 Jeff grinned at her and Derec.Derec shrugged at
Ariel.'93I'92m the human who was in a robot body before,'94 said Jeff to
Can Head. '93I gave you that name and now I have further instructions.
First, don'92t contact the central computer with any of this. Got it?'94
He winked down at Derec. '93I used to say that on my last trip here,
too.'94'93Understood,'94 said Can Head.'93Do you remember me?'94 Jeff
asked.'93No.'94'93You don'92t?'94 Jeff started. '93Then why do you still
answer to Can Head?'94'93I'92ve got it,'94 said Derec. '93All the robots
of Robot City were reprogrammed through the central core, but their
identities and designations were not changed. That would be
counterproductive for Avery because the central computer still has to be
able to contact and recognize all the different robots.'94'93I guess,'94
said Jeff. '93I'92m disappointed. I thought I had an old friend,
here.'94'93That'92s nothing,'94 said Derec. '93You should have seen the
greeting we got from Euler, an old friend of ours. He'92s the one who
sent the Hunters after us.'94'93Anyhow, he'92s being cooperative,'94
said Jeff. '93Maybe we don'92t need our scenario.'94 He turned to Can
Head. '93We must show you something. However, before we do, we request
your help'97no, we require your help under the First Law.'94'93How may I
help?'94 Can Head asked.'93This human is Derec and he is extremely ill.
We'97'94'93He looks it,'94 said Can Head.'93A comedian,'94 Derec
muttered.'93We need you to carry him for us for a while,'94 said
Jeff.'93Why?'94'93We...are being followed by those who would do further
harm,'94 said Ariel, speaking slowly to get the right
phrases.'93Exactly,'94 said Derec.'93Who are they?'94 Can Head
asked.'93We can'92t say,'94 said Jeff. '93But it doesn'92t matter, does
it? Harm is harm under the First Law.'94'93I am under high-priority
programming to migrate,'94 said Can Head. '93To violate it, I must
understand the urgency of the potential harm.'94'93Hold it,'94 said
Derec. '93Let'92s combine the two. Look'97you see where the ground dips
over there?'94'93Yes.'94'93An inactive humanoid robot is lying there.
After you take us to safety, we want you to report it to the central
computer, but not before. You understand?'94'93So far,'94 said Can
Head.'93Before you do that, carry me and lead them on an evasive pattern
toward your assembly point. That will combine your programming with our
needs under the First Law. Can you do that?'94'93My programming requires
that I migrate directly,'94 said Can Head. He turned to look at the dip
in the ground. '93A humanoid robot has malfunctioned here?'94'93Sort
of,'94 said Derec. '93It'92s more like he was mugged.'94'93Mugged? In
the sense of criminal violence?'94'93That'92s what I mean, yeah.'94Can
Head turned his eyeslit directly down at Derec. '93Is this development
directly related to the danger you are in?'94'93Uh'97yes! It is directly
related,'94 said Derec. '93But we don'92t need to discuss how. Will you
help us or not?'94'93I believe this is sufficient reason to take you on
an evasive pattern toward my assembly point.'94 Can Head leaned down and
picked up Derec with surprising gentleness, even for a robot. '93Follow
me,'94 he said to Jeff and Ariel.Derec let out a sigh of relief. As long
as they were moving ahead of the Hunters, they had a chance, and an
evasive pattern taken by a robot might at least be the equal of the
Hunters, ability to solve it. It would be better than their own, at any
rate.He would instruct Can Head to drop them off before he reached his
assembly point and to keep his contact with them secret. At that time,
he thought sleepily, he could cajole an explanation of the migration
programming out of him. Right now, he was just so tired....He was
comforted by the strong, rhythmic stride of Can Head and by the sound of
the footsteps of Jeff and Ariel right behind them. News of the mugging
of their victim was certain to reach Dr. Avery. What Derec needed now
was Mandelbrot. Mandelbrot could contact the central computer and,
unlike Can Head and the other Avery robots, he could he trusted to help
without these convoluted discussions of the Laws.Mandelbrot...and
Wolruf. He drifted off to sleep wondering what had happened to
them.Mandelbrot was standing motionless in a repair facility. The trip
here had been a long one, covering a surprisingly long distance. He had
been deposited here just a moment before by the helpful robot.He had
successfully evaded the Hunters behind him by dual moves. The first was
having that other robot carry him to eliminate his heat trail, and the
second was being identified as a malfunctioning robot. Apparently the
Hunters, with no reason to believe he was in need of repair, were acting
under the assumption that he was still in full flight. He would have to
move on before they thought of checking here.Mandelbrot also had to get
out before the repair robots required his identification, and that would
be any time now.At first he had been surprised by being set down and
left to wait. The efficiency of the Avery robots had led him to expect
immediate handling. As he observed the workings in the repair facility,
however, he concluded that Robot City was, as usual, functioning under
its own distinctive style of efficiency.The repair facility was
processing a large number of damaged or malfunctioning robots.
Mandelbrot guessed from the conversations he overheard through his
comlink that migration programming had largely been completed.
Apparently only skeleton staffs remained anywhere in Robot City now.For
that reason, most repair facilities had also been shut down. The robots
being repaired here were either already assigned to those skeleton
staffs or they were being reprogrammed. Those that entered with
migration orders had them purged and were placed in a pool to act as
reserves for the skeleton staffs instead.So Robot City intended to
function without the migrating robots for an extended period. Further,
any robot that did not reach its assembly point within a short time
would be reassigned. Mandelbrot concluded that he could not afford to
wait here longer at all, or he would risk being reprogrammed and so lost
to the humans as a source of help.Mandelbrot was standing by four other
robots. Two were sitting because of mechanical failures that impaired
standing or walking. The other two were standing, the extent of their
malfunctions not visible. All of them had managed to reach the repair
facility alert and functioning just short of one hundred
percent.Mandelbrot observed the entire room for a moment. A couple of
humanoid robots assigned to the facility supervised a large number of
function robots doing the actual repair work. One function robot was
rolling down the row of waiting robots that Mandelbrot was in, observing
serial numbers or something with an eye on a long, flexible
tentacle.Mandelbrot turned and walked quickly out of the building.
Outside, he mounted a slidewalk and began to run on it toward the
mountains, now invisible in the distance. He knew their direction but
had to follow his memory of the ship viewscreen for the best
route.'93Stop,'94 called a robot on his comlink. '93You are
malfunctioning and therefore endanger yourself by risking greater
malfunctions. This is a Third Law violation that requires you to shut
down'97'94Mandelbrot broke his reception. Since he was in fine
condition, none of that applied. He had known they would see him take
off, and he was gambling that they would not place as high a priority on
catching him as the Hunters had. At worst, they would assign a Hunter to
catch him as a malfunctioned rogue instead of as an intruder involved
with Derec.Ahead, he saw a tunnel stop. Without looking back, he leaped
off the slidewalk and ran down the moving ramp to the loading dock. Then
he was inside a platform booth and had programmed it to go as close to
the mountains as it could take him.The trip would take some time. He
opened his comlink again to reconnoiter.Two general alerts were coming
from the central computer with high priority codes.One was that Hunters
were now seeking a malfunctioning robot who had apparently violated the
Third Law by running away from a repair facility. Because the force of
the Laws was involved, all humanoid robots were ordered to watch for
him. His physical description was given. Since he had escaped from the
repair facility before any scanning was done, they had no more to go on
than that, but he was distinctive from the Avery robots even by
sight.The second alert was that a mysteriously shut-down humanoid robot
had been found in the agricultural park. Nothing was known about the
cause. The Supervisors entered an urgent order that any robots with
information about this development report it immediately.Total
malfunctions of this kind were extremely rare in Robot City. Mandelbrot
was sure that this one called up memories in the minds of the
Supervisors, and probably in Avery himself, of the robot murder that
Derec had solved here.Mandelbrot, of course, was not bound by the
instruction. He was sure that his human friends were somehow responsible
and he was also certain that the Hunters would guess this, as well.
Nevertheless, none of them had proof.Mandelbrot also figured that the
Hunters would guess that the rogue robot was the same one they were
hunting. It made no difference, since he had to avoid them either way.
He now felt the First Law impetus pushing him on, since the Hunters were
likely to be closer to the humans than he was.The platform booth
continued to shoot down the tunnel toward the mountains. It was the
fastest transportation he had, and it seemed painfully slow.CHAPTER
17JEFF'92S FAVORDerec heard Ariel calling his name. It came out of
darkness, out of fog, out of chilly air...until he finally opened his
eyes and found himself looking up at her with some thick, tall grass
waving behind her in the dim glow suffusing the entire valley. He said
nothing at first, trying to remember where they were. The surroundings
were totally unfamiliar to him.'93Derec, please wake up. We have to move
again.'94 Her voice was pleading.'93Come on. I'92ll help you.'94 Jeff
got an arm under Derec and pulled him into a sitting position.'93Where
are we?'94 Derec asked, looking around. His voice was dry and hoarse.
'93What'92s happened?'94'93You fell asleep while Can Head was carrying
you,'94 said Ariel. '93He'92s gone now.'94'93You'92ve been asleep for
some time,'94 said Jeff. '93It must be the middle of the night by now.
It'92s getting colder.'94Derec nodded, folding his arms and rubbing
them. '93But Can Head must have reported the mugged robot to the central
computer, probably right after he left us.'94'93As to where we are,'94
said Ariel, '93Can Head let us down through the valley floor, kind of
zigzagging, and partway up the far slope. I think we'92re in a wheat
field.'94Derec reluctantly let Jeff pull him to his feet. His whole body
seemed to ache. He leaned against Jeff'92s shoulder, breathing hard,
trying to gain his balance.'93We woke you up because we have to keep
going,'94 said Ariel. '93The Hunters aren'92t going to stop for the
night.'94'93Have you got any more ideas, Derec?'94 Jeff asked. '93Avery
should have heard about the mugging by now.'94Derec shook his head,
still trying to wake up. '93I don'92t know what to expect. I don'92t
know how long that news will take to have an effect, either.'94 He
straightened up. '93I meant to ask Can Head about the migration. Do you
know where his assembly point is?'94'93Not really,'94 said Jeff. '93He
went sideways across the slope when he left, but I imagine he was
heading back to that one thoroughfare they were all using.'94'93We
don'92t dare try that,'94 Derec muttered to himself.Ariel suddenly
clutched his arm. She nodded toward something over his shoulder without
speaking.Derec and Jeff turned to look. Far across the same slope, a
humanoid figure was just barely distinguishable in the distance, coming
toward them.'93Let'92s go,'94 Derec said, feeling a faint surge of
excitement. '93It'92s not on the migration route, so it must be a
Hunter, and it'92s sure to have seen us. I'92m afraid it won'92t be long
now.'94The three of them started along the row in the opposite
direction, but Derec was just barely stumbling along. As before, the
others each supported one of his arms across their shoulders. Derec
realized with frustration that he was now too far gone for even the
adrenaline in his system to make much difference.When they reached an
intersecting row between the wheat field and a field of some low, bushy
plants he could not recognize, Jeff stopped and lowered Derec'92s
arm.'93Look, we'92ll have to split up.'94 He looked back at the Hunter,
which was still distant but visibly closer.'93Why bother?'94 Derec said
wearily.'93Maybe I can divert it somehow. And if they get me first,
I'92m probably in the least danger from Avery. He doesn'92t have any
business with me.'94'93He'92s crazy,'94 Ariel said sharply. '93You
can'92t expect rational behavior from him.'94'93Well, maybe not. But
splitting up is the best chance to keep Derec away from him a little
longer. Maybe Avery will show himself in that extra time.'94Derec looked
up to study his face. '93You sure you want to take this much
risk?'94Jeff grinned at him and shrugged. '93Hey, I said lowed you a
favor, didn'92t I?'94Derec gripped his arm for a moment in thanks, then
turned and started up the slope. Ariel threw her arms around Jeff in a
brief hug and then hurried after Derec. Jeff moved a few meters down the
slope and then got down on all fours to crawl through the low bushes of
the adjacent crop field.Derec leaned on Ariel for support as they
plodded slowly up the furrow between the fields. In a moment, the tall
green Auroran-bred wheat had hidden them from immediate view of the
Hunter, but it would have noted the trio'92s movements and communicated
them to the other Hunters, wherever they were.Mandelbrot stood at the
opening of one of the passes into the valley, looking out over the
agricultural park. It was dimly lit and he could just barely see, with
his superior robot vision, tiny figures moving in the distance. He
paused to study the entire valley.Some of the taller and thicker crops
blocked his sight, but he could see a couple of humanoid robots moving
straight up a row on the far slope. They were not behaving like Hunters,
and he suspected that they were migrating. Down in the valley floor, he
saw two large robots moving systematically among the rows of the crops
and was sure that they were Hunters.Then, at another spot on the
opposite slope, he saw a human figure crawling through one of the
fields. As he watched helplessly, a lone Hunter ran up behind him and
lifted the human off the ground. From the lively struggle he saw he knew
the human was not Derec and he judged that Ariel was smaller.Above the
struggle a short distance, he located Derec and Ariel moving painfully
and slowly as they wove their way among some short trees.Mandelbrot'92s
programming and his understanding of the dangers posed by Dr. Avery
placed Derec at the highest of his priorities. While the Hunters were
programmed with a narrow definition of duty that allowed them to detain
humans without harming them, Mandelbrot had a larger perspective and saw
detention by the Hunters as a first step toward virtually certain harm.
At the moment, he would have to ignore Jeff'92s capture and help Derec
and Ariel if he could. He noted the positions and current movements of
the Hunters he could see, and started quickly down the slope.Derec and
Ariel stumbled out of the far side of the fruit orchard onto a
well-traveled footpath headed straight up and down the slope.'93I'92m
totally lost,'94 Derec wheezed. He stopped, bending forward to lean on
his knees. '93But this must be the migration route again. Look at all
the robot footprints. This valley can'92t have very much foot traffic.
And if it did, they would have paved this.'94Ariel nodded and prodded
him up the slope, where the soft mud had been churned unevenly with the
heavy use. The irrigation was obviously turned on at regular intervals.
'93C'92mon,'94 she muttered breathlessly.They had just started up the
incline when a large figure stepped out of the crops above them. It
threw a massive shadow as it started down the slope toward them. Derec
looked up at the great bulk of a Hunter as it moved toward them
carefully, watching its precarious balance on the poor footing.'93Come
on!'94 Ariel yanked him sideways back into the fruit orchard.
'93Hurry.'94'93I can'92t,'94 he whispered apologetically. '93I'92m too
weak to hurry.'94 He followed her, though, until she halted abruptly a
moment later.Another Hunter was waiting for them in the trees ahead, a
dark silhouette against the glow of light behind him.They turned again
and found two more Hunters pushing through the trees, breaking branches
and shaking leaves as they did so, coming right up the slope without
bothering to follow any rows and furrows. Their very silence and
dispassionate demeanor discouraged rebellion.Derec leaned wearily on
Ariel'92s shoulders, unable to struggle. She wrapped her amts around
him, more for his sake, he guessed, than because she was scared. He
glared helplessly at the nearest Hunter.As he watched the Hunter
reaching for them he saw a weirdly flexible robot amt curl around the
Hunter'92s neck from behind. It made a couple of quick motions and the
Hunter froze, completely shut down.Derec blinked at it, too surprised to
react.'93Run!'94 Mandelbrot shouted, emerging from behind the Hunter.
His cellular arm, which Derec had long ago installed and ordered him to
disguise as a normal robotic arm of the time, was just now stiffening
back to normal.'93Come on!'94 Ariel shoved Derec past Mandelbrot to put
their protector between them and the Hunters.They began stumbling
through the trees again, their hope renewed by Mandelbrot. Ariel led him
through a crooked trail, turning and twisting through the fruit trees in
a clumsy, crashing route that ignored stealth entirely. At one point
Derec got caught in a leafy branch and had to pause to get out. He took
the moment to peer back at Mandelbrot.Four Hunters had originally closed
in on them. Mandelbrot had apparently pushed the controls on that first
one to neutralize it and then had attacked the other three. By attacking
them, he brought the Third Law into effect, forcing the Hunters to
protect themselves. This imperative overrode even the strongest
programming, so that they could not continue their pursuit until they
had subdued Mandelbrot.Mandelbrot was outnumbered, but had the advantage
of instructions to use his cellular arm. Further, in the close quarters
among the trees, the greater size of the Hunters impeded them. The
struggle continued, buying Derec and Ariel more time as they hurried
on.Ariel led the way until finally he reached out and grabbed her, too
out of breath to speak up. She waited anxiously until he could, looking
around fearfully.'93Where are we going?'94 He panted.'93I don'92t know.
Anywhere. Just away.'94'93Mandelbrot can'92t win that fight. He can only
slow them down. Then it'92ll start allover again the same way.'94'93Have
you got a better idea?'94 She demanded.He nodded and got down on the
ground among the trees. '93I'92ve been thinking about this park. The way
that robot path is chewed up by the footprints and all. It means this
park normally doesn'92t have an erosion problem.'94'93Yeah, so?'94'93So
these crops still need water, and it'92s obviously managed with their
usual efficiency. If this valley is irrigated by underground pipes or
something, we'92ve had it. But I don'92t think the robots would do that,
because leaves need external moisture, too.'94'93Get to the point, will
you? Or let'92s go.'94'93Irrigation outlets. This valley has to have
them in some form. If we turn them on, they'92ll eliminate our heat
trail.'94'93Well....'94 She knelt down beside him. '93They could be
anywhere. And it'92s dark. Besides, Derec, this is a high-altitude
valley. Maybe the natural fog and rain take care of all that.'94'93That
would be leaving too much to chance. We have to figure this
out.'94'93How?'94He sat back and looked at her. His legs no longer hurt;
they were nearly numb. '93All right. Instead of looking at random, we
have to work it out logically, like the robots would. Where would you
place irrigation outlets for the greatest efficiency?'94'93How do I
know?'94'93Well, I can hardly think at all!'94'93All right, all right.
Concentrate. We'92re on a slope.... Derec, come on. This way.'94He
nodded and forced himself after her, stumbling on feet he could hardly
feel.After a walk that seemed much longer than it could possibly have
been, they stopped along a row between the trees that ran horizontally
along the slope. Now Derec was the one looking all around for Hunters
that could come from any direction.'93They must use these furrows as a
kind of terracing,'94 said Ariel. '93I think we'92re right in the middle
of the vertical rows. If they put the irrigation spigots near here, they
would lose the least amount to runoff down the slope. The same with fire
control.'94'93It sounds good to me,'94 said Derec, collapsing to the
ground again. '93Let'92s find it.'94'93If it'92s here,'94 she added,
joining him on the ground.'93I got something.'94 Derec'92s hand had come
across a small cylinder sticking up perhaps fifteen centimeters from the
surface of the ground. He got down low to look at it in the faint
light.'93Now what?'94 Ariel whispered, moving next to him. '93It
doesn'92t have any controls or anything. What if the sensors are
somewhere else?'94'93It'92s possible,'94 said Derec slowly. '93But look
how high it is. Why would they do that? They don'92t do anything
sloppily here, or without a reason. They don'92t waste material,
either.'94'93Derec, we can'92t just sit here and try to outguess them.
Who knows?'94 She shook her head. '93Maybe we should just keep running,
huh?'94He shook his head. '93This is the only real chance we have left.
Come on, help me bury it.'94'93What?'94'93Hurry! Why else would it be so
tall? This whole thing is its own sensor. It probably judges air
moisture and precipitation and who knows what.'94'93How do you
know?'94'93I think they designed it at this height so it wouldn'92t be
covered by minor shifts in the soil during hoeing and other care. If we
cover it with dirt, it'92ll stop sensing. Come on!'94 He was already
scraping up the soft black soil, which the function robots seemed to
keep turned constantly, and began packing it around the cylinder.She
joined him without further argument. They found the soil damp enough to
stick to the cylinder if they packed it hard, and before long it was
covered. Derec wiped the dirt off his hands on some leaves.'93Now
what?'94 She asked, wiping off her own hands. '93Nothing'92s
happening.'94CHAPTER 18DOWN A HOLEAt the far end of the valley, Wolruf
sat quivering in the chilly air. She was huddled high in the mountains
in a vertical crevice of rock. This was the compromise she had reached
for her conundrum: she was in the valley where she could try to observe
the humans or even Mandelbrot if they were here when day broke. At the
same time, she would not lead the Hunters following her directly to
them.Now she could not see any of them in the faint light down in the
valley. In the nearer regions below her, function robots were visible
doing their regular chores among the crops. Her physiology kept her just
warm enough at this altitude to remain for a while, but she was not
comfortable. Nor did she have the energy left to run farther.She waited
patiently, reviewing the moves she had made to break her trail. None of
them could avoid a systematic search by the Hunters if they were close
enough to detect her heat. Also, the Hunters probably had checked the
pass at some point, because it was a bottleneck that could quickly tell
them if she was inside the valley or out.If her heat trail had faded
before they had reached it, they still had physical signs to rely on.
She had been as careful as possible, but the robotic vision of the
Hunters could detect extreme detail. The rest was up to them.Her ears
perked up at the sound of footsteps on the rock fall below her. With no
more energy left for fleeing, she waited patiently. The giant shape of a
Hunter emerged from the darkness, thrown into silhouette by the distant
glow emanating from the crops below. She knew it would not harm her, but
it would take her prisoner and possibly deliver her to Dr. Avery, who
could certainly harm her if he wished. She shivered as the Hunter
reached down to pick her up.Derec was staring disconsolately at the
dirt-covered sensor when it suddenly erupted in an uneven spray,
knocking loose some of the dirt. Ariel and he both flinched. All around
them, other spigots were also spraying jets of fine mist into the
air.'93That'92s it!'94 Derec lifted his arms toward her. '93Let'92s go.
Can you help me up?'94Ariel took his arms and pulled. His legs gave out
under him. She wasn'92t strong enough to lift him.She started to pull
again.'93I can'92t walk any more.'94 His lower legs and feet had lost
all feeling.'93You can'92t walk at all?'94 Her shoulders slumped.'93But
I can crawl. Let'92s go.'94'93Derec...?'94'93Come on!'94 He started
crawling through the soft earth, which was quickly turning to mud.She
stood and walked alongside him. '93This is crazy. We'92re hardly getting
anywhere.'94'93We have a lot more time now. The Hunters can'92t follow
our heat trail so they'92ll have to start a pattern search. And at least
one of them will have to carry Mandelbrot after they'92ve shut him
down.'94'93Derec, you'92ve only gone two meters!'94He stopped, sighing,
and looked ahead. She was right. He could barely move. '93Hey'97what'92s
that thing?'94'93What?'94 She looked, too.Some kind of large rectangular
shape, at least a cubic meter in size, was emerging from the ground
below the trees.'93That...thing, there. We haven'92t seen one of those
before.'94 He started crawling again.'93There'92s one behind us, too,'94
she said. '93And beyond that one. They'92re coming up all over. They
were completely hidden before.'94'93We must have triggered them along
with the irrigation. Go see what it is.'94She hurried ahead and stopped
in front of the object, bending low in front of it. After a moment, she
came back and knelt down. '93I think we can get inside it. It looks like
a ventilation duct or something.'94Derec nodded. He had stopped crawling
to get his breath again. His head was spinning dizzily.When she got down
on all fours and moved under him, he let her. She gathered his arms
around her neck and maneuvered under him. Then, supporting his weight,
she began to crawl much faster than he had, carrying as much of his
weight as she could.He hung on with his arms and closed his eyes against
the spray of water.'93Here,'94 she said, after a few moments.He opened
his eyes into a gaping black opening with no other features. As she
eased out from under him, he reached inside and felt for the shape of
the object.'93It'92s not a straight drop.'94 She helped him climb
inside. '93You can feel a gradual incline.'94Derec hesitated, too
disoriented to speak but still reluctant to throw himself into an
unknown hole.'93Go on, get in before the Hunters see us.'94He was losing
all sense of his surroundings. Following directions was easier than
arguing. He worked his way inside the opening and then suddenly was
sliding downward and accelerating.All was in darkness. He felt a rushing
of air, the smooth pressure of the surface against his back as he slid,
and Ariel bumping against him from above as she slid with him. Vaguely,
he realized he was too exhausted to feel any fear.He should have been
terrified of winding up in a moving fan blade, for instance, or in the
workings of some mysterious robot creation that would convert them both
to fertilizer. Apparently he had been on Robot City too long for that.
The robots couldn'92t allow that much danger to a human to exist
here.No, that wasn'92t it, either. The reason was even simpler. Nothing
on this planet was more frightening than the chemfets destroying his
body from the inside at this very moment.The sensation of falling
continued as they entered some turns, gradual curves, and finally
reached a sudden upturn.In the short ascent, gravity broke their
momentum and then they slid backward again. Derec lay motionless, aware
that they had stopped in the bottom of this thing, whatever it was. No
light reached them at all.He felt Ariel move a little, probably getting
her bearings.'93Derec?'94 She said softly.'94 Are you hurt?'94A moment
passed before he had the breath to answer. '93No,'94 he whispered.
'93But I'92ve had it.'94'93We'92re safe now,'94 she said, feeling for
him and stroking his hair.'94 At least from the Hunters. I'92m sure of
it. They'92ll have to search the entire valley, and every one of these
things. And these were popping up every few meters, it looked like....
well, every fifty or sixty, anyhow. Without a heat trail to follow,
it'92ll take them forever.'94'93I can'92t do it.'94'93But we'92re onto
him! Avery, I mean. I'92m sure of it.'94 She shuffled around and seemed
to stand. '93You know that upward curve at the end of our...little ride?
It'92s here and not very high. The duct continues on a level from here.
Say, you know what else? There are handholds of some kind on the side
opposite the one we slid down.'94'93Maybe for service robots to make
repairs down here.'94 He thought a moment. The temptation to go on was
strong. Confronting the crazy doctor after all the suffering he had
endured...but he couldn'92t move. All he wanted to do was sleep.'93I
think you'92re right,'94 he said finally. '93This is a ventilation duct.
From the size and number of them, it must lead to an immense living
space.'94'93Avery'92s home. Robots wouldn'92t need it or the produce in
the valley. Come on, let'92s go. I'92ll help you up.'94'93You'92ll have
to go on alone. I honestly can'92t move.'94She was quiet a moment. '93Do
you really want me to go on without you?'94'93Yes.'94'93All right,'94
she said slowly. She waited, perhaps trying to think of something else
to say. Then she got her arms around him and embraced him very hard, and
held on.He was too weak to respond. After a moment, he felt her let go
and stand up. Then she was climbing, and he heard her moving down the
ventilation duct away from him.He closed his eyes and slept.Ariel felt
her way forward slowly with her hands as she crawled, not making any
move until she knew what was ahead of her. She was still in absolute
darkness in some kind of giant tube that was so far stretching straight
ahead on a level course. With Derec unable to move, she was painfully
aware that she was the last of their group to have a chance at finding
Dr. Avery.She was not exactly in top condition herself. Her hands and
feet were painfully cold and she was drenched from the sprinklers. She
was worn out, too, though not sick like Derec was. The climb up the
mountainside and down into the valley had taken a lot of energy out of
her.She hoped, with guarded optimism, that her memory was growing
stronger. Those weird memory fugues had grown less frequent and she
wished fervently that none would strike while she was alone in this
thing, whatever it was.She began to find branches and intersections in
the passageway. Without any way to pick one direction over another, she
attempted to go as straight as she could. Going in roughly one direction
would at least prevent her from wandering hopelessly in circles. She
suspected that the intersecting tunnels represented those other openings
on the surface they had seen.After a while, she thought she had picked
out a pattern. From what she could feel, smaller tunnels seemed to
converge more often and become larger ones consistently to her left. She
began to move leftward and discovered that the tunnels were now high
enough for her to stand if she bent over.Now that she was moving in this
direction, more tunnels converged around her all the time. Then they
started branching out again, some of them splitting off above her.
Finally she realized that she could see hints of shapes: dark spaces
that represented openings one way, a faint reflection of an inner
surface another way.The traces of a light source shone from just one
direction.She dropped to all fours again to pursue the light source, now
more concerned with making noise than with the height of the
tunnel.Around a curve, she reached something recognizable: a covered
opening into a room. Barely daring to breathe, she moved as quietly as
she could toward it until she could peek through the opening.It was
nearly opaque.The room was lit, but she couldn'92t see much. It was
carpeted in brown. Nor could she hear anything.After the silence had
continued, she decided that she would have to risk entering the room.
She began studying the edge of the covering to see if she could get it
loose. In a moment, she found that pressure on the covering itself
caused a hole to appear in the middle. The substance, whatever it was,
receded from the hole to fade outward into the surrounding wall until
the vent was entirely open.She let out a sigh of relief that the room
was deserted. It was still silent, as well. After shifting around to get
her feet out first, she dropped to the floor of the room and looked
around.It was a small room, perhaps only three meters cubed. The brown
carpeting went all the way up the walls and covered the ceiling as well.
The light came from a globe floating just under the center of the
ceiling.She looked again at the ceiling, then at the walls. The room was
not built on right angles. The corners were slightly askew.A couple of
computer tapes were piled on the floor. In one corner, a small stuffed
animal of unrecognizable type lay on its side. The room was not being
used for anything that she could see.This was not what Ariel had
expected from Dr. Avery.The door was closed. She held her breath and
pushed the stud on the wall next to it. It slid open silently.She
remained where she was, waiting. When nothing happened, she stuck her
head out slowly. She found a hallway extending maybe six meters one way
and four the other. The hallway itself was oddly shaped, but
familiar'97then she recognized it. It was a hollow three-dimensional
rendition of the Key to Perihelion.She stepped into the hallway. The
closed doors at each end of it were also shaped like the Keys. She chose
one and walked toward it.This one opened as she reached it. She
hesitated, then edged through. Her mouth dropped open in surprise.This
room reminded her of some ancient historical paintings she had seen. The
high vaulted ceiling was at least two stories high and hung with
curtains of burgundy velvet. Imitation Renaissance paintings in garish
gold frames seemed to fit what she remembered of that period...or did
they? Yet that furniture...was classic Auroran design, developed many
centuries later. She looked up again, trying to orient herself...and
shuffled quickly to one side to catch her balance.This room was also
askew. Worse than that, she guessed, it was not built on angles at all.
Though the corners of the ceiling and walls were partly hidden by
curtains, the whole room seemed oddly rounded, even twisted out of
shape, as though the room had begun as a rectangle, had started to melt,
and then had frozen again.She started across the room to look more
closely at the furniture. After four steps, the floor gave out beneath
her and she fell, sliding this time down a short, twisting chute. She
heard the trapdoor above her hiss closed again as she landed somewhere
else with a thump.This room was tiny, with just barely enough room for
her to stand up. It, too, was in the shape of the Keys. There was a door
in each wall that was big enough, and nothing else. The walls glowed
with light, as in the Compass Tower. She pressed a stud by one of the
doors.The door slid open to reveal a solid glowing wall. She opened
another one. This door opened to reveal a dark, narrow hallway. Before
trying it, she pushed another stud.A weirdly sculptured face stared at
her from an archaic red brick wall. It had pointed ears, a long pointed
face, and was laughing. Grimacing, she closed that one and tried
another.Another dark hallway stretched in front of her.She had to go
somewhere. With a glance at the other open doorway, she edged inside.
The walls here didn'92t glow, and she slid her feet carefully along the
floor before committing her weight forward. After a few steps, the
corridor began to curve.A moment later, she had followed it right back
to the same little room again. Ariel closed the doors to the circular
hallway and stood inside the room. It might not have an exit, of course;
this was the work of a paranoid who'92s tendencies had been openly
revealed. The room could just be a prison.'93Well, now what?'94 She said
aloud.A muffled response sounded behind one of the doors. She pressed
the stud and found herself looking at the grotesque sculptured face
again. All its features were exaggerated.'93What did you say?'94 She
demanded.'93Pull my nose,'94 it said.'93Who are you?'94'93Pull my
nose.'94'93What happens when I do?'94'93Pull my nose.'94'93Is that all
you can say?'94'93Pull my nose.'94She watched it for a moment. '93One,
two, three.'94'93Pull my nose.'94She figured it out, then. This was a
function robot without a positronic brain. It had one line to say,
triggered by any sound of human speech.Holding her breath, she pulled
its nose.The long, narrow nose stretched toward her and then suddenly
snapped back, out of her grasp. On impact, the entire sculpture
collapsed into itself, inverted, and pushed itself out the other way.
Then the brick wall broke into quarters and each piece receded sideways,
carrying the inverted face with it.She was looking down a short ramp
into another corridor, this one lined with glowing stones cut in the
shape of the Keys but not in a smooth surface. Their corners protruded
irregularly out of the wall to create a jagged, textured wall. The
entire shape of the corridor as she faced the opening was in the shape
of the corridor as she faced the opening was in the shape of the Keys,
as well.Still stepping carefully, she ventured down the ramp. After a
moment, she realized that she was chillier than before'85air was moving
against her soaked clothing. Puzzled, she turned around'97and found the
walls, ceiling, and floor behind her converging to pinch off the
corridor after she had passed.She hurried forward a little, despite her
caution, and came up against a stone wall at the end. Starting to panic,
she ran her hands across the stones, feeling for a control of some kind.
She felt nothing and whirled around to look at the shrinking
corridor.Suddenly something dropped from the ceiling in front of her and
she flattened against the end wall, trying to see the object as it
swayed before her face. She recognized it as Wolruf'92s head, dangling
on a long piece of rope tied into an ancient noose.As she stared at it
in horror, she realized that it was only a function robot rendered in
realistic detail.'93Why arr '91u '91err?'94 The robot asked, in
Wolruf'92s voice.Ariel'92s spine prickled at the sound. She glanced
behind the hanging head. The corridor had stopped closing behind her and
now had left her in a very small dungeonlike space.'93Wrong answer,'94
said the robot, though she hadn'92t spoken.Suddenly the floor rose under
Ariel'92s feet, pushing her up toward the ceiling. The rope retracted
with her, keeping the Wolruf head level with her as she rose. The
ceiling opened and then the section of floor stopped, now flush with the
floor just above the stone corridor.The abrupt halt threw her off
balance and she fell on a rich, gold carpet. Above her, five elaborate
chandeliers sparkled and shone from a surprisingly low beamed ceiling.
She rose up on her elbows, looking around fearfully.She was in a
library. Shelves of antique books, not computer tapes, stretched around
all the walls and were protected by a transparent barrier of some kind.
Turning, she stepped off the lift platform away from the Wolruf head.A
candelabra of some sort was on a shelf outside the transparent barrier
that protected the books. It stood inside a blue and white bowl, leaning
to one side. The candelabra was on a round base, with one central stem
holding one candle and four branches arching upward on each side to
total nine. She had never seen one before, whatever it was, and thought
it seemed out of place here, as though someone had set it down and
forgotten it.She stepped back and looked at the bowl. It was large
enough to serve four or five people plenty of food. Light blue designs
danced around the white background on the outside. It had never been
meant to hold a candelabra, though. Someone had left these here
carelessly.'93What iss it?'94 The Wolruf head asked.Ariel flinched at
the sound and looked at the head. '93A candleholder of some kind,
obviously.'94'93Wrong again.'94One of the shelved walls glided away
soundlessly. She stood where she was, eyeing the dark opening that
appeared. An animal'97no, a function robot, almost certainly'97stepped
into a space where light fell on it. It had Wolruf'92s caninoid body and
Ariel'92s own face.'93If you'92re standing on the surface of the planet
Earth in Webster Groves, Missouri,'94 said the robot-Ariel, '93which way
is Robot City?'94She stared at it hopelessly. '93I'92m no navigator. Not
without some kind of information to use, anyway.'94Robot-Ariel cocked
her head, turned, and trotted away.The wall of shelves slid back into
place.Ariel sank to the floor in a mixture of relief and despair. She
couldn'92t just go on wandering aimlessly in the real-life manifestation
of one man'92s insanity. If this place offered a way out, she could
figure it out. If it didn'92t, she might as well stay in this room
instead of going forward into some dungeon cell or something worse.As
before, her knowledge of Dr. Avery was the only source of clues she had,
and she no longer had Jeff'92s memories or Derec'92s facility with
robots to help. All right. Basically, what did she know?She knew he was
a genius, that he was paranoid, that he wanted to create a perfect
society. But what did this crazy place have to do with order and
rationality? What was it doing on Robot City?Everything she knew about
Robot City said that this place just didn'92t belong here at all. The
more she thought about it, the more she realized that every line of
thought brought her back to that one conclusion. '93That'92s it,'94 she
whispered to herself suddenly. '93He'92s gone over the edge. He'92s even
crazier than before.'94In the heart of a planet-wide city based on logic
and efficiency, its creator had lost his mind.She smiled at the irony.
It wasn'92t funny, exactly, but it was...funny. Somehow.Exhaustion and
fear made her giddy. She began to giggle. The more she thought about
this'97about all their discussions of the Laws of Robotics and all their
convoluted efforts to reason with the positronic brains of the
robots'97and how it had led to this....She really began to laugh. She
fell onto the floor on her back, laughing in the little room by
herself.The wall of shelves slid open again, apparently triggered by the
sound of her laughter.Suddenly on guard again, she sat up and looked
around. The function robot with her face was back.'93If you'92re
standing on the surface of the planet Earth in Webster Groves,
Missouri,'94 said the robot-Ariel again, '93which way is Robot
City?'94Ariel giggled again. '93Up, of course.'94 She laughed'97and the
floor gave way beneath her.She was in one more chute, twisting in a
tight downward spiral. Just as it began to level off, the dark space
ahead of her irised open into light. She spilled out onto a polished
hardwood floor.Shaken by the ride, she lay still for a moment gazing at
a very high beamed ceiling that was nearly lost in shadows. She turned
her head to the side and found walls of gray stone, precisely chiseled
and fit again in the modular shape of the Key to Perihelion. The room
was huge, stretching meters on each side of her.She raised onto her
elbow, still getting her bearings. The end of a large, intricately
carved table was in front of her. Its legs and feet were sculpted in the
shape of some furry, clawed animal she did not recognize. It was made of
a dark, deeply polished wood.Struggling to rise, she reached up and
grabbed the edge of the table. She pulled herself up to lean on it and
then froze in surprise. At the far end of the table, many meters away, a
man sat in a high, straight-backed chair with a gigantic fire blazing
behind him in a stone fireplace twice her height.'93Welcome, Ariel. I am
Dr. Avery.'94She stared at him with nothing to say. After all the effort
to find him, landing here like this was so unexpected that she hadn'92t
formed any plan of attack, any arguments to use with him. She wasn'92t
ready to talk to him.'93You are welcome to warm yourself by the fire,'94
said her host.She was willing to stay chilly to keep away from him, but
she wanted to stall a little if she could, without getting too close.
Slowly, she moved around the corner of the table and began to walk down
the side of it. Dr. Avery seemed relaxed, even unconcerned, as he
fingered some small object in front of him on the table.The long, narrow
table had all kinds of articles on it: flowers, dishes, trinkets, small
sculptures. She didn'92t dare take the time to look. Her eyes remained
on Dr. Avery.He was short. looking especially so in the high-backed
chair. His build was stocky. Wavy white hair framed his face, which was
also adorned with a bushy mustache. He looked friendly and benign.His
coat was too big, as she remembered from the other times she had seen
him, and he still wore a white shirt with a ruffled collar.He didn'92t
look crazy.Ariel stopped a good four meters away, still watching him.
What was a crazy man supposed to look like?'93I was not expecting
visitors, Ariel,'94 said Dr. Avery. He was still studying the object in
front of him. '93Though I had warning that oddities, shall we say, were
occurring in this vicinity.'94He didn'92t sound crazy, either.'93Ariel,
you don'92t remember me, do you?'94 His gaze remained on the
table.'93Yes,'94 she said timidly.'93No, not really. You remember me
after the performance of Hamlet and when the Hunter robots located all
of you in the passageways beneath the city and you remember me from when
they brought you to me. That'92s all.'94'93That'92s when we met.'94He
smiled and picked up the little object. '93Automatic alarms were
triggered tonight. A couple of them, in fact. When a man who enjoys his
privacy feels it may be disturbed, he likes to have alarms installed.
Did you trigger them, Ariel?'94She watched him silently, surprised by
his changing subjects so quickly.'93A humanoid robot mysteriously shut
down completely just a short distance from here. Then a shift in the
soil was reported. Did you do those, Ariel?'94'93Kind of. I
guess.'94'93You guess. I guess, too. Violations of the provisional Laws
of Humanics? Perhaps. I haven'92t yet investigated the details. But how
did you enter my abode?'94Derec was lying helpless along her route. She
didn'92t dare answer that question.'93One of the few weaknesses in my
security here is in my emergency ventilation system. It opens when
unexplained malfunctions occur in this valley.'94 He sighed. '93I could
have had the robots make it entry-proof, but it happens to represent my
escape routes, as well. If no one could get in that way, then I
couldn'92t get out that way, could I?'94'93What do you want?'94 she
demanded, hoping to get him off that subject. '93What is all this about,
anyway?'94'93Of course, I do have a maze that one must negotiate. It
acts as a buffer zone. Perhaps you managed that.'94She was shaking with
tension, unable to get a handle on a conversation that kept jumping
topics.'93By the way, I'92ve misplaced a couple of items. Have you seen
them? One is an antique menorah crafted in the ancient Earth empire of
the czars. The other is a Ming Dynasty bowl.'94She stared at him,
vaguely remembering a fancy bowl.'93You really don'92t remember me, do
you, Ariel?'94'93Why do you keep saying that?'94'93You have new memories
now, clearly. You are not the Ariel I last saw. You are again the real
Ariel, if you only knew it. A few more accurate memories will trigger
the rest, I believe.'94'93What are you talking about?'94'93Your memories
now are accurate. It is the real you. The one you thought was you...no.
You never knew a Spacer who contaminated you. You never had a disease.
You will, I sadly suppose, recall the name...David Avery.'94 For the
first time, then, he looked up and met her eyes.David Avery. David.
Derec...?Suddenly memories did come flooding back. '93David! Derec is
David! And you hated me!'94'93Oh, now, now. What I attempted with you
failed. Bygones are bygones, eh?'94'93You...what have you done?'94 She
was horrified, yet fascinated. Finally, after such a long time, the
mysteries were being answered. '93Oh, no. Wait a minute. Is Derec really
David...or what about the corpse? Was that David? Did you kill him?'94
She was nearly hysterical, partly from the shock of understanding.'93No,
no, of course not.'94 He waved a hand in dismissal. '93The corpse, as
you call it, was merely a synthetic physical imitation of David. A good
one, of course, that used genuine human blood. I used him in a dry-run
test of David'92s encounter with Robot City.'94Ariel, still quivering
with tension but now composed again, leaned against the table for
support. '93So you planted memory chemfets and disease in me a long time
ago to give me a false memory. Memories of events that never existed to
replace my memories of real life. And...Derec is David.'94'93And you
were his lover. Oh, by the way, didn'92t you ever wonder what happened
to the corpse? The cleaning robots recognized it as nothing more than
waste material and hauled it away.'94'93You destroyed my memory,'94 she
said again, slowly. '93And his. The amnemonic plague was artificial,
created by chemfets. It was you. To separate David and me. You must have
given him his amnesia for the same reason.'94'93I always knew you had
intelligence. My son'92s taste was always exceptional.'94'93And ever
since my memory returned on Earth, I withheld telling Derec the truth
because I was afraid these memories might not be correct. All this time,
I could have put his mind at ease if I had only trusted my
memories.'94'93A compliment. Consider my actions a compliment. Breaking
your hold on my son'92s will required extreme measures. Judge it as the
extent to which he cares about you.'94 He leaned back in his chair,
holding the little item he had been playing with. '93Cared, I should
say. He doesn'92t remember even now, of course...but he does seem to
have formed an affection for you allover again, seen by the way you two
have remained a team.'94'93You practically destroyed two people just to
keep them apart.'94 Her anger was mixed with sheer astonishment.'93Ah,
no. Sorry. You are not so important as you think. My other motive was to
test my son'92s resourcefulness. You see, if he succeeded in
manipulating and controlling Robot City, then he was truly worthy of my
final plan for him.'94'93Final plan...? Do you mean to say,'94 she said
slowly, '93that you wiped his memory and placed him on that asteroid as
a test?'94'93It is what I mean to say and what I have said.'94 He sat up
and for the first time his face reflected enthusiasm. '93You see, Robot
City has been finished. Now each of the humanoid robots here has had
implanted in his body...one or two duplicate Keys to Perihelion. Even
now, they are marching to predetermined sites around this planet from
which they will launch themselves to different galaxies. In each galaxy,
they will begin replication of themselves and construction of more Robot
Cities. And David, my son who has now earned the right to act as my son,
will control each and every robot in every Robot City...making him the
most powerful man in the universe!'94'93He what? How?'94'93The chemfets,
my dear. The memory chemfets in his body. You see, a tiny Robot City is
growing inside him...and when it matures, his mere thoughts will control
every Avery robot in the universe.'94'93Oh, no...you are insane. You
don'92t know what'92s happened to him!'94'93Of course I do. The chemfets
develop slowly and cause certain physical disabilities. I know that.
They behave like a disease and can even cause the formation of
antibodies in the bloodstream.'94'93You'92re murdering him! He'92s
almost dead now!'94'93Oh, nonsense. The chemfets didn'92t kill you, did
they? I wouldn'92t kill him, would I? After all this? Why would I throw
away all this effort?'94'93But you'92re wrong! Your chemfets for me were
much simpler. He'92s dying!'94'93Where is he?'94She paused, suddenly
realizing the dilemma that Derec and she had never solved. They could
not force Dr. Avery to cooperate. He had to be convinced.'93The central
computer is calling. For several moments now, I have ignored a little
light on my table here. I have done so because I know what it signifies,
I believe. Excuse me, will you?'94Ariel stared at him, amazed at his
composure and his refusal to believe her.A small section of the table in
front of Dr. Avery swiveled to reveal a computer console on what had
been the underside of the table. '93Would you like to hear?'94 He pushed
a button. '93I'92ll set it on voice, which I usually find intrusive.
Report,'94 he said into the console.'93HUNTERS REPORT APPREHENSION OF
HUMAN NAMED DEREC.'94'93Thought so,'94 said Dr. Avery pleasantly.
'93Report status of Hunter project.'94'93THE FOLLOWING HAVE BEEN
APPREHENDED AND ARE HELD ON THE NORTH SLOPE OF THE VALLEY: DEREC, JEFF
LEONG, MANDELBROT, WOLRUF. STILL MISSING: ARIEL WELSH.'94Dr. Avery
laughed casually. '93Now, who would have thought I could outperform my
own team of Hunter robots?'94Ariel'92s heart was pounding with tension.
If Derec was already in Avery'92s control, very little risk was left.
'93Dr. Avery. Will you agree to a test?'94'93Eh? What kind of test?
Haven'92t we had enough testing around here for a while?'94'93Have the
robots check David and see if he is in danger from the chemfets.
They'92ll tell you.'94'93A party,'94 said Dr. Avery. '93An excellent
idea. I'92ll have the Hunters bring everyone. We'92ll have a party.'94
He tossed the object in his hand over his shoulder into the fire.Ariel
saw it clearly for the first time. It was a small model of a humanoid
robot.CHAPTER 20TO RULE IN ROBOT CITYAriel watched the gray stones, or
whatever they were, in the wall dissolve into air for a moment and the
Hunters brought in their captives through the opening. The first one
carried Derec gently in his arms as though he were a giant baby, but
limp and unconscious. The second entered holding Jeff Leong firmly by
one upper arm as they walked. The third held Wolruf cradled on one elbow
and the fourth marched in with Mandelbrot lying over his shoulder,
completely shut down.The stone wall reformed behind them.'93Clear the
table,'94 said Dr. Avery. '93Don'92t worry about where the stuff
goes.'94The Hunter carrying Mandelbrot laid him down on the floor and
then extended his arm along the full width of the table at the far end.
He then walked down the length of the table as his arm knocked
everything it struck onto the floor. By the time he had reached the near
end, Dr. Avery had himself swept aside the items within his own
reach.Ariel watched in horror. She had never seen a humanoid robot act
so messily, even destructively, on a casual instruction. This one must
have known that Dr. Avery wanted to be taken literally and did not want
him to remove the items on the table with any care.'93Put him down.'94
Dr. Avery nodded to the Hunter holding Derec. Then he waved at the one
carrying Mandelbrot. '93And turn him on, will you? This won'92t be much
of a party with so many people feeling unsociable.'94Ariel felt some
relief as the Hunter located Mandelbrot'92s controls and activated him
again. '93Mandelbrot, tell him. Tell Dr. Avery what'92s happening to
Derec.'94Mandelbrot scanned the room quickly. His observation probably
told him as much about the current situation as Ariel already knew.
'93Dr. Avery,'94 he said clearly. '93Derec has undergone extreme
physical debilitation that continues to increase. He believes that the
chemfets you placed in his body are killing him. My observation of his
symptoms confirms that likelihood.'94'93Doesn'92t anybody here want to
have a party?'94 Dr. Avery sighed. '94Everyone is so morbid. Say, Mr.
Leong. Haven'92t we met before? Not lately and not on this planet,
however.'94'93That'92s right,'94 Jeff said sullenly. '93You were more
sociable in those days, yourself.'94Dr. Avery pushed back his chair and
stood up. Trailing the fingers of one hand along the table, he walked
down its length looking at the motionless figure of Derec. '93He has
done very well. I have not given him any challenge he cannot
surmount.'94'93Till now.'93 Ariel insisted. '93How can you take a risk
like this? Even your own robots wouldn'92t risk his life for a
test.'94Jeff, Wolruf, and Mandelbrot all looked at her in surprise.
'93Oh, I don'92t think he'92ll have any trouble. He'92ll be fine.'94 Dr.
Avery nodded to himself.'93Aren'92t you even going to test him? Check
him out in your laboratory?'94 She cried.'93He'92ll be fine. Let'92s
have a party.'94 Dr. Avery turned to the Hunter who had brought Derec
in. '93Take him to one of the guest rooms, though. We can'92t have a
party with a guest lying motionless on the dining table, can
we?'94'93Hold it!'94 Ariel got between Derec and that Hunter. '93Can'92t
you understand that he'92s dying?'94'93Pick him up,'94 Dr. Avery
ordered.The Hunter gently but firmly moved Ariel aside and lifted Derec.
She threw her arms around Derec'92s shoulders and hung on. '93Wait!
Mandelbrot, they'92re letting him die!'94Mandelbrot was standing by the
Hunter who had brought him in. That Hunter, however, had one hand
resting on Mandelbrot'92s open control panel. At the slightest
resistance from Mandelbrot, the Hunter would shut him down again.The
next sequence of events took place very quickly, some of it timed by the
speed of positronic brains.Suddenly Jeff, who was still held by one
Hunter, reached over and started grabbing Mandelbrot'92s Hunter by the
neck, feeling around quickly for his controls. The Hunter, required by
the Third Law to protect himself, grasped Jeff'92s arm in his other
hand. In the tiny fraction of a second that the Third Law imperative was
foremost in the Hunter'92s mind, Mandelbrot stepped away and closed his
own control panel with his flexible cellular arm.From the moment
Mandelbrot was free, the battle was on. His belief that Derec'92s life
was in danger forced him under the First Law to take Ariel'92s anxiety
seriously. At the same time, the Hunters believed Dr. Avery'92s
declaration that Derec was not in danger, so under the Second Law they
followed their orders from him to detain and control the
others.Mandelbrot also shot out an array of information through his
comlink to the Hunters. He told them of Derec'92s delicate condition, of
Ariel'92s memory failures, of their physical hardships. In the tiny
instant it required, he demanded that they back away from Derec and
Ariel immediately or risk major violations of the First Law.He did not
know if it would work, but even the slightest hesitation and doubt on
their part would help.Even as Mandelbrot sent these signals, he moved
toward Derec. Ariel let go of Derec to grab the Hunter holding him,
knowing that the Hunter would be impeded by the necessity of not harming
Derec or her. In a couple of quick moves, Mandelbrot'92s flexible arm
had shut down this Hunter in a motionless standing position, still
holding Derec. Mandelbrot and Ariel lifted Derec and placed him back on
the table.One Hunter had now taken Wolruf and Jeff under each arm and
had lifted them into the air where they squirmed helplessly.'93You'92re
hurting me!'94 Jeff shouted. '93First Law violation!'94The Hunter was
not convinced.'93Stop them!'94 Dr. Avery screamed. '93Don'92t hurt them,
but stop them! And don'92t collide with David! His condition is too
fragile!'94'93You'92ve got to believe us!'94 Ariel shouted, turning to
plead with him. '93You don'92t want him hurt, either! Just test
him!'94They stood face-to-face now and Ariel saw a strangely twisted
expression on his face. It was an angry smile of triumph. For the first
time since meeting him, she understood that he truly was crazy'97and
beyond persuasion by reason.'93You did this!'94 Dr. Avery hissed in her
face. '93Without you, these extremes would not have been necessary.
Leave him alone!'94'93How dare you blame this on me?'94 She screamed,
and in a mixture of frustration, rage, and exhaustion she lost her
temper completely. Unbound by any Laws except her conscience, she
launched herself at him angrily, grabbing his sideburns in both
hands.One of the four Hunters had been shut down. Another was holding
Jeff and Wolruf away from Mandelbrot. Mandelbrot was trying to reach the
unguarded control panel of this one with his flexible arm while using
his other arm to grapple with the other two Hunters. With all the
robots'92 attention focused on each other across the room, they did not
notice or respond to the potential harm Ariel and Dr. Avery might do to
each other.Dr. Avery grimaced in pain and growled at her as they
shuffled around in a tight struggle.Deep in the darkness of Derec'92s
mind, robots marched. He was lying on his back in darkness as robots
stepped in rhythmic time with a precision only robots could maintain.
They strode by him in files that split at his feet and tramped past him
on either side, their heavy feet pounding by his head. He was ignored,
insignificant, not even present in their positronic awareness.Out of
darkness, the robots marched. A slight glow of skyline shone behind them
but mostly he could see only a bloodred sky above, one that had never
really existed, where space stretched endlessly beyond the planet. Still
the robots streamed past, intent on their destination with that
single-mindedness so evident in the Avery creations.Avery. Avery. Avery.
The beat of pounding feet seemed to take on the name. It was name of his
enemy, the name of... of...His dream shifted. Even as the robots
continued to march, he watched strange green shapes, some cubic and some
pyramidal, rising in the air around him. When he reached for them,
missing, he floated up after them. They turned, light shining off their
different facets as they rose. He snagged one and it became a computer
console under his hands.He was floating higher in the air now. The blood
night of Robot City threw its myriad streets into a golden glow without
logic or explanation, and '93Still the robots marched. His fingers
seemed to type without thought from his mind: '93Stop them.'94'93NO,'94
answered the central computer.'93Stop the city.'94'93NO.'94'93Why
not?'94'93WHO ARE YOU?'94'93I am I am I am...who am I?'94'93WHERE ARE
YOU?'94'93I am...Robot City.'94'93ERROR. I AM ROBOT CITY,'94 said the
central computer. '93WHO ARE YOU?'94'93Who am I?'94'93YOU ARE DAVID
AVERY.'94'93I am David Avery?'94 Derec stared at the name on the dream
console. The dream console was green, made of a floating pyramid like a
tiny Compass Tower...made of a chemfet.He looked around. This wasn'92t
the real central computer. The blood-red sky told him how small he was.
He was floating in his own bloodstream, watching chemfets and Robot City
grow inside him...'93I am David Avery,'94 he typed. '93I am David Avery.
This is my bloodstream, my body, my...Robot City.'94'93ACKNOWLEDGED,'94
said the central computer.The robots stopped marching. He floated in the
air high above them now and looked down on the endless rows of robots.
Every single Avery robot on the planet raised its head to await
Derec'92s commands.He raised his head and shouted, '93Robot City is
mine! I am David Avery and I am Robot City!'94At his shout, the sky
split. The scene dissipated. He blinked and gradually heard more yells
and scraping sounds around him. A chandelier was blazing over him. He
took in a deep breath'97and realized that, for the first time in a very
long time, his body felt normal.His mind was clearing slowly as he came
awake. His body was tired, and cold with dampness, but the weird
stiffness was gone. He was no longer in physical danger.'93Derec!'94
Ariel yelled. '93You'92re awake? Tell him! Tell Avery what'92s happening
to you.'94Avery? With a surge of fear and anger, Derec sat up and found
himself on a long table. He turned. Ariel and his father, Dr. Avery,
were scuffling around in a circle.'93I'92m all right,'94 Derec said
hoarsely.'93What?'94 Ariel looked at him in surprise. '93Then help
me!'94'93No!'94 Dr. Avery roared. '93No! This is not right! You must
help me!'94'93Help you?'94 Derec shouted angrily. '93You'92re
crazy!'94'93Kill them!'94 Dr. Avery screamed at the Hunters. '93Kill
them! You must kill them or everything will be for naught!'94Ariel
pulled free of him and turned toward the two Hunters who were still
functioning; Mandelbrot had succeeded in shutting down a second one.
'93Dr. Avery is mad. You understand? He'92s...he'92s malfunctioned. You
remember the Laws of Humanics that the Supervisors were trying to
devise?'94Dr. Avery had backed away toward the fireplace. '93You must
save us!'94 he shouted at the Hunters. '93Kill them!'94'93Listen to
him,'94 Ariel called out, now more in control. '93His orders violate the
First Law. You can'92t trust his orders any more. Orders that violate
the Laws of Robotics also violate the Second Law of Humanics, which says
humans will not give robots unreasonable orders. Listen to him, and
you'92ll understand that he can'92t be followed anymore.'94 If the
Hunters had learned how she and Jeff and Derec had shut down Pei, they
wouldn'92t listen to her, either.The remaining Hunters had not moved.
One held Jeff and Wolruf. The other was in a stand-off with Mandelbrot,
as each tried to reach the manual controls of the other to shut him
down.'93Acknowledged,'94 said the Hunter holding Jeff and Wolruf. '93Dr.
Avery'92s instructions cannot be followed. However, the central computer
also directs us. We are still under orders to detain the members of your
group without harming them.'94Dr. Avery had cowered into a corner, still
shouting.'93I am Robot City now,'94 said Derec. '93The chemfets in my
body have matured and I have reprogrammed them.'94 He visualized the
computer console in his mind. Maybe he wouldn'92t always have to do
that, but right now it made the task easier. '93Central computer,'94 he
thought. '93Eliminate the orders to the Hunter robots regarding Derec or
David Avery, Ariel Welsh, the robot Mandelbrot, and the caninoid alien
Wolruf. Then notify all pertinent robots of the change.'94 Then aloud he
said, '93Hunters. A new order should come through to
you'97'94'93Acknowledged,'94 said the Hunter in front of Mandelbrot. He
straightened, dropping his guard'93Acknowledged,'94 echoed the other
Hunter, releasing Jeff and Wolruf.'93I received it also,'94 said
Mandelbrot.'93Now, then,'94 said Derec, turning to Dr. Avery.Dr. Avery
was standing in the corner of the room to one side of the giant
fireplace. As the others turned to watch him, he drew himself up.
'93Consider what you have accomplished, my son,'94 he said. '93Think of
it. Everything I envisioned to this point has come to pass as I
intended. Well, almost'97never mind this young woman. You rule in Robot
City. Soon you will rule in every Robot City, in thousands of them
throughout all the galaxies.'94A stinging sadness came over Derec,
draining his anger. '93You'92re...not right. Not right in the head. You
started out seeking a utopia and instead you'92ve gotten sidetracked.
This has become a springboard for power, not for good. Maybe if you took
it easy for a while, got some professional advice...'94'93You dare to
order me?'94 Dr. Avery yelled. '93No! You join me! I order
it!'94'93I'92m not a robot. You can'92t order me.'94 Derec turned to the
Hunters. '93Please detain my...detain Dr. Avery without harming
him.'94The two Hunters started forward.With a twisted sneer, Dr. Avery
lifted a small object in one hand: a Key to Perihelion. He laughed
derisively and then vanished.Derec walked slowly to the head of the
table, still looking at the space where Dr. Avery had stood. His relief
was tinged with melancholy at understanding his father'92s
condition.Everyone was watching him.He turned at his father'92s chair,
resting one hand on the back of it. '93Mandelbrot, please put those
items on the floor back on the table. Hunters, your task is over. Please
return to your holding area, or wherever you normally reside.'94The
robots obeyed.'93Are you really okay?'94 Ariel asked, moving toward him.
'93David?'94He grinned and put his arm around her. '93I guess so. David
seems to be okay, and so is Derec.'94'93I seem to be okay, too.'94 She
put her arms around him and they embraced.None of them wanted to split
up for the night or go exploring for bedrooms in the Avery estate. As
tired as they were, Derec, Ariel, Jeff, and Wolruf were able to sleep by
the fire even on the hard floor. Derec knew that Dr. Avery might have
transported elsewhere on the planet and could still pose a danger, but
he doubted any threat would be immediate. Just before going to sleep, he
gave a general order throughout Robot City that all robots were to
remain where they were until further notice, except for minimal
activities to keep the city operating. That way he would have time later
to figure out exactly what status the city was in and how to return the
robots from their assembly points to normal duties. With Mandelbrot
standing by and Robot City under his own mental control, he fell into a
genuine sleep.The next morning, Ariel pointed out the table console to
Derec in case he had a use for it. He really didn'92t, finding that he
was able to contact any branch of the computer system on the planet with
his mind. This morning he started with the one in Dr. Avery'92s
kitchen.The entire group, including Mandelbrot, sat at the long table
with a real breakfast served by two kitchen robots. It included fresh
produce and dishes processed from produce instead of from limited
nutrient tanks. Derec and Ariel shared their separate adventures with
everyone, then Wolruf and Jeff gave their stories. Since Mandelbrot had
been shut down for much of the time they had been separated, he had
little to tell.When the anecdotes had ended, Derec sat at the head of
the table in an upbeat mood, thinking over his new responsibilities.'93I
guess I can have the central computer worry about the particulars of
what I have to do,'94 he mused. '93If I instruct the central computer to
return all the robots to their normal duties, it will do all the
organization itself.'94'93But you can really control it with your
mind?'94 Ariel asked. '93And you can program robots mentally,
too?'94'93Apparently I can. I'92m still getting used to the idea
myself.'94'93To all your human attributes,'94 said Mandelbrot, '93you
have now added some of the advantages of a robot. '93Jeff laughed.
'93Without the liabilities, if you know what I mean.'94 He winked.While
the others laughed, Derec was aware of a message in his mind from the
central computer, answering a question he had posed.'93NO EVIDENCE OF
DR. AVERY ON THE PLANET HAS BEEN REPORTED,'94 said the central
computer.If Dr. Avery was here at all, Derec realized, he now had all
the disadvantages they had had while on the run from him. They now had
all the resources he had used. Even more, considering that they were not
burdened by insanity.Considering Dr. Avery'92s paranoia, Derec felt
certain that he had left the planet. Maybe he had gone home to Aurora.
Perhaps he had returned to his apartment on Earth, or had other
hideaways in reserve, as well.'93Thank '91u,'94 said Wolruf. '93Good
brreakfasst. Could sleep morr now.'94'93I believe we can locate
comfortable sleeping rooms here,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93The luxury of
this room and this meal imply similar luxury elsewhere in this
residence.'94'93I'92ll find a way to shut down the booby-traps and
riddles,'94 said Derec, grinning at Ariel.She laughed. '93It'92s hard to
believe. For the first time, Robot City will be at peace, running
smoothly, and no longer full of mystery.'94'93And you have plenty of
Keys to Perihelion with which to travel,'94 said Mandelbrot. '93Perhaps
Wolruf can be sent home.'94She shrugged her caninoid shoulders. '93Resst
first.'94'93I wonder what kind of shape the ship is in,'94 said Jeff.
'93I only rented it.'94'93Don'92t worry,'94 said Derec. '93I'92ll have
the Minneapolis fully repaired, cleaned, polished, and outfitted for
you. We'92re more than square for any debt you felt you owed us. But
you'92re welcome to stay as long as you want.'94'93Thanks,'94 said Jeff.
He shook his head, grinning. '93Robot City. It'92s never been a dull
town.'94When everyone had finished breakfast, Jeff and Wolruf excused
themselves to accompany Mandelbrot in further exploration of Dr.
Avery'92s immense quarters.Later, after function robots had cleared the
table and Derec and Ariel were alone in the great hall, he stood gazing
into the fire that continued to blaze. He still felt melancholy.'93Is
something wrong?'94 Ariel asked quietly.'93Oh...I was just thinking
about Dr. Avery. How his wonderful plans got all twisted. And how after
researching cultures with Professor Leong and all, he just seemed to
drop that subject after a certain point. He is obviously a brilliant
man, yet he threw so much away.'94 He looked up at her. '93I found out
something, too.'94'93What?'94'93I'92m not sure we stopped him in time
after all. From what I can get out of the central computer, I think some
of the robots may have launched themselves from their assembly points
before I cancelled that instruction.'94Ariel drew in a quick breath.
'93If that'92s true, then they will be building more Robot Cities, just
as Dr. Avery wanted. And who knows what precise orders he gave
them?'94'93I may be able to find that out in the computer,'94 said
Derec. '93Maybe I can even call them back somehow; I won'92t know till I
spend some time on it. But there'92s something else.'94'93What? What'92s
wrong?'94'93I have my identity back, but...I still have amnesia. I
don'92t have all my memory back.'94 He turned to look at her. '93Finding
my father wasn'92t exactly constructive.'94'93Maybe you could...oh, I
don'92t know. Perhaps locating your mother would help. Or some of the
Avery robots might know of a way to help. Just think how much help you
might get from Robot City and even the robots that may have
left.'94Derec nodded. '93I haven'92t given up. Don'92t worry about
that.'94 He grinned. '93That isn'92t me. And from what I'92ve seen, it
isn'92t you, either.'94'93It certainly isn'92t...David.'94Ariel laughed,
looked into his eyes, and tossed her hair back. On an impulse, he slid
his arms around her waist and drew her close. Then he kissed her waiting
lips and felt her arms tighten around his neck.Isaac Asimov:S Robot City
continues with Robot City # 7, in which Derec is summoned to a distant
planet and encounters a robotic experiment fantastically different from
anything he has seen on Robot City.DATA BANKCARGO ROBOT: Not all of the
robots of Robot City are positronic in nature. Many of those whose jobs
are especially simple have been equipped with brains that are more like
computers than like robot brains. These function robots are analogous to
the tools used by positronic robots. They are incapable of real thought;
they are also not bound by the Three Laws of Robotics.The cargo robot is
one example of a non-positronic function robot. Programmed with a map of
Robot City and its transport systems, it is essentially a container that
can load and unload itself and move along preset paths. It has just
enough intelligence to avoid obstacles and decide which cargoes should
be loaded in the internal compartment and which should be carried on the
forklift-like arms.WILLIAM F. WUWilliam F. Wu is a five-time nominee for
the Hugo, Nebula, and World Fantasy Awards. He is the author of the
novel Master Play, about computer wargamers for hire, and he has had
short fiction published in most of the magazines and many anthologies in
the field of science fiction and fantasy, including a series of
collaborations with Rob Chilson in Analog. He is also the author of
Robot City 3: Cyborg. His short story, '93Wong'92s Lost and Found
Emporium,'94 was adapted into an episode of the new Twilight Zone
television show in 1985 and his first published story, '93By the Flicker
of the One-Eyed Flame,'94 was adapted and performed on stage in 1977. He
holds a Ph.D. in American Culture from the University of Michigan, and
is married to fantasy artist Diana Gallagher Wu.}  
