{10{} 411033020 Prodigy - Isaac Asimov's Robot City Book 4 - Arthur
Byron CoverISAAC ASIMOV'92SROBOT CITYBOOK 4: PRODIGYARTHUR BYRON
COVERCopyright 'a9 1988THE SENSE OF HUMORISAAC ASIMOVWould a robot feel
a yearning to be human?You might answer that question with a
counter-question. Does a Chevrolet feel a yearning to be a Cadillac?The
counter-question makes the unstated comment that a machine has no
yearnings.But the very point is that a robot is not quite a machine, at
least in potentiality. A robot is a machine that is made as much like a
human being as it is possible to make it, and somewhere there may be a
boundary line that may be crossed.We can apply this to life. An
earthworm doesn't yearn to be a snake; a hippopotamus doesn't yearn to
be an elephant. We have no reason to think such creatures are
self-conscious and dream of something more than they are. Chimpanzees
and gorillas seem to be self-aware, but we have no reason to think that
they yearn to be human.A human being, however, dreams of an afterlife
and yearns to become one of the angels. Somewhere, life crossed a
boundary line. At some point a species arose that was not only aware of
itself but had the capacity to be dissatisfied with itself.Perhaps a
similar boundary line will someday be crossed in the construction of
robots.But if we grant that a robot might someday aspire to humanity, in
what way would he so aspire? He might aspire to the possession of the
legal and social status that human beings are born to. That was the
theme of my story "The Bicentennial Man" (1976), and in his pursuit of
such status, my robot-hero was willing to give up all his robotic
qualities, one by one, right down to his immortality.That story,
however, was more philosophical than realistic. What is there about a
human being that a robot might properly envy'97what human physical or
mental characteristic? No sensible robot would envy human fragility, or
human incapacity to withstand mild changes in the environment, or human
need for sleep, or aptitude for the trivial mistake, or tendency to
infectious and degenerative disease, or incapacitation through illogical
storms of emotion.He might, more properly, envy the human capacity for
friendship and love, his wide-ranging curiosity, his eagerness for
experience. I would like to suggest, though, that a robot who yearned
for humanity might well find that what he would most want to understand,
and most frustratingly Jail to understand, would be the human sense of
humor.The sense of humor is by no means universal among human beings,
though it does cut across all cultures. I have known many people who
didn't laugh, but who looked at you in puzzlement or perhaps disdain if
you tried to be funny. I need go no further than my father, who
routinely shrugged off my cleverest sallies as unworthy of the attention
of a serious man. (Fortunately, my mother laughed at all my jokes, and
most uninhibitedly, or I might have grown up emotionally stunted.)The
curious thing about the sense of humor, however, is that, as far as I
have observed, no human being will admit to its lack. People might admit
they hate dogs and dislike children, they might cheerfully own up to
cheating on their income tax or on their marital partner as a matter of
right, and might not object to being considered inhumane or dishonest,
through the simple expediency of switching adjectives and calling
themselves realistic or businesslike.However, accuse them of lacking a
sense of humor and they will deny it hotly every time, no matter how
openly and how often they display such a lack. My father, for instance,
always maintained that he had a keen sense of humor and would prove it
as soon as he heard a joke worth laughing at (though he never did, in my
experience). Why, then, do people object to being accused of
humorlessness? My theory is that people recognize (subliminally, if not
openly) that a sense of humor is typically human, more so than any other
characteristic, and refuse demotion to subhumanity.Only once did I take
up the matter of a sense of humor in a science-fiction. story, and that
was in my story "Jokester," which first appeared in the December, 1956
issue of Infinity Science Fiction and which was most recently reprinted
in my collection The Best Science Fiction of Isaac Asimov (Doubleday,
1986).The protagonist of the story spent his time telling jokes to a
computer (I quoted six of them in the course of the story). A computer,
of course, is an immobile robot; or, which is the same thing, a robot is
a mobile computer; so the story deals with robots and jokes.
Unfortunately, the problem in the story for which a solution was sought
was not the nature of humor, but the source of all the jokes one hears.
And there is an answer, too, but you'll have to read the story for
that.However, I don't just write science fiction. I write whatever it
falls into my busy little head to write, and (by some undeserved stroke
of good fortune) my various publishers are under the weird impression
that it is illegal not to publish any manuscript I hand them. (You can
be sure that I never disabuse them of this ridiculous notion.)Thus, when
I decided to write a joke book, I did, and Houghton-Mifflin published it
in 1971 under the title of Isaac Asimov's Treasury of Humor. In it, I
told 640 jokes that I happened to have as part of my memorized
repertoire. (I also have enough for a sequel to be entitled Isaac Asimov
Laughs Again, but I can't seem to get around to writing it no matter how
long I sit at the keyboard and how quickly I manipulate the keys.) I
interspersed those jokes with my own theories concerning what is funny
and how one makes what is funny even funnier.Mind you, there are as many
different theories of humor as there are people who write on the
subject, and no two theories are alike. Some are, of course, much
stupider than others, and I felt no embarrassment whatever in adding my
own thoughts on the subject to the general mountain of commentary.It is
my feeling, to put it as succinctly as possible, that the one necessary
ingredient in every successful joke is a sudden alteration in point of
view. The more radical the alteration, the more suddenly it is demanded,
the more quickly it is seen, the louder the laugh and the greater the
joy.Let me give you an example with a joke that is one of the few I made
up myself:Jim comes into a bar and finds his best friend, Bill, at a
comer table gravely nursing a glass of beer and wearing a look of
solemnity on his face. Jim sits down at the table and says
sympathetically, "What's the matter, Bill?"Bill sighs, and says, "My
wife ran off yesterday with my best friend."Jim says, in a shocked
voice, "What are you talking about, Bill? I'm your best friend."To which
Bill answers softly, "Not anymore."I trust you see the change in point
of view. The natural supposition is that poor Bill is sunk in gloom over
a tragic loss. It is only with the last three words that you realize,
quite suddenly, that he is, in actual fact, delighted. And the average
human male is sufficiently ambivalent about his wife (however beloved
she might be) to greet this particular change in point of view with
delight of his own.Now, if a robot is designed to have a brain that
responds to logic only (and of what use would any other kind of robot
brain be to humans who are hoping to employ robots for their own
purposes?), a sudden change in point of view would be hard to achieve.
It would imply that the rules of logic were wrong in the first place or
were capable of a flexibility that they obviously don't have. In
addition, it would be dangerous to build ambivalence into a robot brain.
What we want from him is decision and not the to-be-or-not-to-be of a
Hamlet.Imagine, then, telling a robot the joke I have just given you,
and imagine the robot staring at you solemnly after you are done, and
questioning you, thus.Robot: "But why is Jim no longer Bill's best
friend? You have not described Jim as doing anything that would cause
Bill to be angry with him or disappointed in him."You: "Well, no, it's
not that Jim has done anything. It's that someone else has done
something for Bill that was so wonderful, that he has been promoted over
Jim's head and has instantly become Bill's new best friend."Robot: "But
who has done this?"You: "The man who ran away with Bill's wife, of
course."Robot (after a thoughtful pause): "But that can't be so. Bill
must have felt profound affection for his wife and a great sadness over
her loss. Is that not how human males feel about their wives, and how
they would react to their loss?"You: "In theory, yes. However, it turns
out that Bill strongly disliked his wife and was glad someone had run
off with her."Robot (after another thoughtful pause): "But you did not
say that was so."You: "I know. That's what makes it funny. I led you in
one direction and then suddenly let you know that was the wrong
direction."Robot: "Is it funny to mislead a person?"You (giving up):
"Well, let's get on with building this house."In fact, some jokes
actually depend on the illogical responses of human beings. Consider
this one:The inveterate horseplayer paused before taking his place at
the betting windows, and offered up a fervent prayer to his
Maker."Blessed lord," he murmured with mountain-moving sincerity, "I
know you don't approve of my gambling, but just this once, Lord, just
this once, please let me break even. I need the money so badly."If you
were so foolish as to tell this joke to a robot, he would immediately
say, "But to break even means that he would leave the races with
precisely the amount of money he had when he entered. Isn't that
so?""Yes, that's so.""Then if he needs the money so badly, all he need
do is not bet at all, and it would be just as though he had broken
even.""Yes, but he has this unreasoning need to gamble.""You mean even
if he loses.""Yes.""But that makes no sense.""But the point of the joke
is that the gambler doesn't understand this.""You mean it's funny if a
person lacks any sense of logic and is possessed of not even the
simplest understanding?"And what can you do but turn back to building
the house again?But tell me, is this so different from dealing with the
ordinary humorless human being? I once told my father this joke:Mrs.
Jones, the landlady, woke up in the middle of the night because there
were strange noises outside her door. She looked out, and there was
Robinson, one of her boarders, forcing a frightened horse up the
stairs.She shrieked, "What are you doing, Mr. Robinson?"He said,
"Putting the horse in the bathroom.""For goodness sake, why?""Well, old
Higginbotham is such a wise guy. Whatever I tell him, he answers, 'I
know. I know,' in such a superior way. Well, in the morning, he'll go to
the bathroom and he'll come out yelling, 'There's a horse in the
bathroom.' And I'll yawn and say, 'I know, I know."'And what was my
father's response? He said, "Isaac, Isaac. You're a city boy, so you
don't understand. You can't push a horse up the stairs if he doesn't
want to go."Personally, I thought that was funnier than the joke.Anyway,
I don't see why we should particularly want a robot to have a sense of
humor, but the point is that the robot himself might want to have
one'97and how do we give it to him?CHAPTER lCAN YOU FEEL ANYTHING WHEN I
DO THIS?"Mandelbrot, what does it feel like to be a robot?""Forgive me,
Master Derec, but that question is meaningless. While it is certainly
true that robots can be said to experience sensations vaguely analogous
to specified human emotions in some respects, we lack feelings in the
accepted sense of the word.""Sorry, old buddy, but I can't help getting
the hunch that you're just equivocating with me.""That would be
impossible. The very foundations of positronic programming insist that
robots invariably state the facts explicitly.""Come, come, don't you
concede it's possible that the differences between human and robotic
perception may be, by and large, semantic? You agree, don't you, that
many human emotions are simply the by-products of chemical reactions
that ultimately affect the mind, influencing moods and perceptions. You
must admit, humans are nothing if not at the mercy of their bodies.
""That much has been proven, at least to the satisfaction of respected
authorities. ""Then, by analogy, your own sensations are merely
byproducts of smoothly running circuitry and engine joints. A spaceship
may feel the same way when, its various parts all working at peak
efficiency, it breaks into hyperspace. The only difference between you
and it being, I suppose, that you have a mind to perceive it."Mandelbrot
paused, his integrals preoccupied with sorting Derec's perspectives on
these matters into several categories in his memory circuits. "I have
never quite analyzed the problem that way before, Master Derec. But it
seems that in many respects the comparison between human and robot,
robot and spaceship must be exceedingly apt.""Let's look at it this way,
Mandelbrot. As a human, I am a carbon-based life-form, the superior
result of eons of evolution of inferior biological life-forms. I know
what it feels like because I have a mind to perceive the gulf between
man and other species of animal life. And with careful, selective
comparison, I can imagine'97however minimally'97what a lower life-form
might experience as it makes its way through the day. Furthermore, I can
communicate to others what I think it feels like.""My logic circuits can
accept this.'94'93Okay then, through analogy or metaphor or through a
story I can explain to others what a worm, or a rat, or a cat, or even a
dinosaur must feel as they hunt meat, go to sleep, sniff flowers, or
whatever.""I have never seen one of these creatures and certainly
wouldn't presume to comprehend what it must be like to be one.""Ah! But
you would know'97through proper analogy'97what it must be like to be a
spaceship.""Possibly, but I have not been provided with the necessary
programming to retrieve the information. Furthermore, I cannot see how
such knowledge could possibly help me fulfill the behavioral standards
implicit in the Three Laws.""But you have been programmed to retrieve
such information, and your body often reacts accordingly, and sometimes
adversely, with regards to your perceptions."'"You are speaking
theoretically?'94'93Yes.""Are you formally presenting me with a
problem?""Yes.""Naturally I shall do my best to please you, Master
Derec, but my curiosity and logic integrals are only equipped to deal
with certain kinds of problems. The one you appear to be presenting may
be too subjective for my programmed potentials. "'93Isn't all logic
abstract, and hence somewhat subjective, at least in approach? You must
agree that, through mutually agreed upon paths of logic, you can use the
certain knowledge of two irrefutable facts to learn a third, equally
irrefutable fact. "'93Of course.""Then can't you use such logic to
reason how it might feel to be a spaceship, or any other piece of
sufficiently advanced machinery?"'93Since you phrase it that manner, of
course, but I fail to comprehend what benefit such an endeavor may bring
me'97or you."Derec shrugged. It was night in Robot City. He and
Mandelbrot had been out walking. He had felt the need to stretch his
muscles after a long day spent studying some of the problems
complicating his escape from this isolated planet. But at the moment
they were sitting atop a rectangular tower and staring at the stars.
"Oh, I don't know if it would be of any benefit, except perhaps to
satisfy my curiosity. It just seems to me that you must have some idea
of what it is like to be a robot, even if you don't have the means to
express it."'93Such knowledge would require language, and such a
language has not yet been invented."'93Hmmm. I suppose.""However, I have
just made an association that may be of some value."'93What's
that?"'93Whenever you or Mistress Ariel have had no need of my
assistance, I have been engaging in communication with the robots of
this city. They haven't been wondering what it means or feels like to be
a robot, but they have been devoting a tremendous amount of spare mental
energy to the dilemma of what it must be like to be a human."'93Yes,
that makes sense, after a fashion. The robots' goal of determining the
Laws of Humanics has struck me as a unique phenomenon.""Perhaps it is
not, Master Derec. After all, if I may remind you, you recall only your
experiences of the last few weeks, and my knowledge of history is rather
limited in scope. Even so, I never would have thought of making
connections the way you have, which leads my circuits to conclude your
subconscious is directing our conversation so that it has some bearing
on your greater problems."Derec laughed uncomfortably. He hadn't
considered it before. Strange, he thought, that a robot had. "My
subconscious? Perhaps. I suppose I feel that if I better understand the
world I'm in, I might better understand myself.""I believe I am acting
in accordance with the Three Laws if I help a human know himself better.
For that reason, my circuits are currently humming with a sensation you
might recognize as pleasure.""That's nice. Now if you'll excuse me, I'd
like to be alone right now." For a moment Derec felt a vague twinge of
anxiety, and he actually feared that he might be insultingMandelbrot, a
robot that, after all they'd been through together, he couldn't help but
regard as his good friend.But if Mandelbrot had taken umbrage, he showed
no evidence of it. He was, as always, inscrutable. "Of course. I shall
wait in the lobby."Derec watched as Mandelbrot walked to the lift and
slowly descended. Of course Mandelbrot hadn't taken umbrage. It was
impossible for him to be insulted.Crossing his legs to be more
comfortable, Derec returned to looking at the stars and the cityscape
spread out below and beyond, but his thoughts remained inward. Normally
he was not the reflective type, but tonight he felt moody, and gave in
easily to the anxiousness and insecurity he normally held in check while
trying to deal with his various predicaments more logically.He smiled at
this observation on what he was feeling. Perhaps he was taking himself
too seriously, the result of lately reading too much Shakespeare. He had
discovered the plays of the ancient, so-called "Immortal Bard" as a
means of mental escape and relaxation. Now he was finding that the more
he scrutinized the texts, the more he learned about himself. It was as
if the specific events and characters portrayed in the plays spoke
directly to him, and had some immediate bearing on the situation in
which he had found himself when he had awakened, shorn of memory, in
that survival pod not so long ago.He couldn't help but wonder why the
plays were beginning to affect him so. It was as if he was beginning to
redefine himself through them.He shrugged again, and again pondered the
stars. Not just to analyze them for clues to the location of the world
he was on, but to respond to them as he imagined countless men and women
had throughout the course of history. He tried to imagine how they had
looked to the men of Shakespeare's time, before mankind had learned how
the universe came to be, where the Earth stood in relation to it, or how
to build a hyperspace drive. Their searching but scientifically ignorant
minds must have perceived in the stars a coldly savage beauty beyond the
range of his empathy.One star in the sky, perhaps, might be the sun of
his homeworld. Somewhere out there, he thought, someone knew the answers
to his questions. Someone who knew who he really was and how he came to
be in that survival pod.Below him was the city of towers, pyramids,
cubes, spires and tetragons, some of which, even as he watched, were
changing in accordance with the city's program. Occasionally robots,
their activity assisting the alterations and additions, glistened in the
reflections of the starlight reflected in turn from the city walls. The
robots never slept, the city never slept. It changed constantly,
unpredictably.The city was like a giant robot, composed of billions upon
billions of metallic cells functioning in accordance to nuclei-encoded
DNA patterns of action and reaction. Although composed of inorganic
matter, the city was a living thing, a triumph of a design philosophy
Derec called "minimalist engineering."Derec had partially been inspired
to ascend to the top of this tower'97through a door and lift that
appeared when he needed them'97precisely because he had watched its
basic structure coil, snakelike, from the street like a giant, growing
ribbon. And once the ribbon had reached its preordained height, the
cells had spread out and coalesced into a solid structure. Perhaps they
had multiplied as well.Two towers directly in front of him merged and
sank into the street as if dropping on a great lift. About a kilometer
away to his right, a set of buildings of varying heights gradually
became uniform, then merged into a single, vast, square construction. It
stayed that way for approximately three minutes, then methodically began
metamorphosing into a row of crystals.A few days ago, such a sight would
have instilled within him a sense of wonder. Now it was all very
ordinary. No wonder he had sought to amuse himself by engaging in what
he had thought was a slight mental diversion.Suddenly a tremendous glare
appeared in the midst of the city. Derec averted his eyes in panic,
assuming it was an explosion.But as the seconds passed and the glare
remained, he realized that no sound or sensation of violence had
accompanied its birth. Whatever its nature, its presence had been
declared as if it had been turned on by a switch.Feeling a little
self-conscious, he slowly removed his fingers from his eyes and ventured
a look. The glare was coalescing into a series of easily definable
colors. Various hues of crimson, ochre, and blue. The colors changed as
the tetragonal pyramid they were coming from changed.The pyramid was
situated near the city's border. The eight-sided figure was balanced
precariously on the narrow tip of its base, and it rotated like a
spinning top in slow motion. From Derec's vantage point it resembled a
tremendous bauble, thanks to those brilliantly changing lights.Watching
it, he gradually felt all anxieties cease. His own problems seemed
dwarfed into insignificance compared to the splendor of this sight. What
beauty this city was capable of!Soon this feeling of calm was uprooted
by his growing curiosity, a restless need to know more that quickly
became overwhelming, relentlessly gnawing. He would have to examine the
building firsthand, then return to his "roost" where his access controls
were, and get down to seriously plumbing the depths of the city's
mysterious programming.Like the plays of Shakespeare, the strange
structure seemed a good place to escape to for a time. Besides, he never
knew'97he might find out something that would help him and Ariel get off
this crazy planet."So there you are!" said a familiar voice behind him.
"What are you doing here?"He looked up to see Ariel staring down at him.
She stood with her legs apart and her hands on her hips. The breeze blew
strands of hair across her nose and mouth. She had a mischievous light
in her eyes. Suddenly it was time to forget the city for a moment and to
stare at her. Her unexpected presence had taken his breath away. His
nerves had come back.All right, he admitted to himself, so it's not just
her presence'97it's her'97everything about her!"Hi. I was just thinking
of you," he managed to say, the catch in his voice painfully obvious, at
least to him."Liar," she said with combined sarcasm and warmth. "But
that's all right. I wanted to see you, too.""Have you noticed that
building?""Of course. I've been standing here for the last few moments,
while you've been zoned out. Amazing, isn't it? I bet you're already
trying to figure out how to analyze it.""Oh, of course. How did you find
me?" he asked."Wolruf sniffed you out. She and Mandelbrot are waiting
downstairs.""What's Wolruf doing down there?""She doesn't like the cold
air up here. Says it makes her too nostalgic for the wild fields during
those cold autumn nights." Ariel sat down beside him. She leaned back
and supported herself on her palms. The fingers of her right hand almost
touched his.Derec was acutely aware of her fingers' warmth. He wanted to
stretch out his hand the half-inch it would take to touch them, but
instead he leaned back on his elbows and scrunched his hands close to
his sides."What are you doing up here in the first placer' she
asked."Making a pit stop.'94'93Huh?"The moment's silence between them
was decidedly awkward. She blinked, then stared at the rotating
building.During that moment, Derec's thoughts shuffled like cards, and
he was on the verge of blurting many things. But in the end he finally
decided on the noncommittal, "I've just been taking a break from
things.""That's good. It's healthy to stop thinking about worrisome
things for a while. Have you come up with a way out of here yet?""No,
but you must admit the here-and-now isn't a bad place to be in, compared
to some of our predicaments.""Please, I don't want to think about
hospitals now. If I never see another diagnostic robot again, it'll be
too soon for me.""But you'll be better off when you do!" Derec
exclaimed, immediately regretting the words.Ariel's face darkened with
anger. "Why? Just because I've got a disease that's slowly driving me
insane?""Uh, well, yes. For a beginning.""Very funny, Mr. Normal. Hasn't
it occurred to you that I might like the disease, that I might prefer
the way my mind is working now to how it worked during the time when I
was 'sane'?""Uh, no, it hasn't, and I don't think it has occurred to
you, either. Listen, Ariel, I was attempting to make a joke. I didn't
mean to offend you, or even to bring the subject up. The words just
stumbled out. ""Why am I not surprised?" Ariel turned away from him with
a shrug."I want you to be well. I'm concerned for you."She wiped her
face and forehead. Was she perspiring?Derec couldn't tell in the dark.
"Listen, you've got to understand that lately I've been experiencing
serious difficulty in keeping my thoughts straight," she said. "It's not
always bad. It comes and it goes. Even so, sometimes I feel like someone
is pulling my brain out of my head with a pair of pliers. I just got
over one of those moments.""I'm sorry. I didn't know." Derec suddenly
felt like his heart had been caught in pliers, too. The inches between
them seemed like a gulf. He wondered if he was insane, too, to think of
crossing that gulf and taking her in his arms. He wondered if she would
relax when he glided her head to his chest.He decided to change the
subject, in the hopes of changing the unspoken subject, too. "You know,
even though I still don't know my identity, I think I've managed to find
out a lot of things about myself since I awoke on that mining complex.
I've discovered I've got pretty good instincts. Especially about being
able to tell who my friends are.""Yeah?""Yeah. And upon due
consideration, I've come to the conclusion that you just might be one of
them."Ariel smiled. "Yeah? You really think so?"Derec smiled in return.
"That's for me to know and for you to find out.""Well, I can live with
that." She pursed her lips. "So tell me, Mr. Genius, how does that
building fit in with the city's programming?""I don't know. It's an
anomaly.'94'93What do you call that shape?'94'93A tetragonal
pyramid.""Looks like two pyramids stuck together to me.'94'93That's why
it's called tetragonal.""Look how it shines, how the colors glitter. Do
you think Dr. Avery is responsible? He's responsible for everything
else.""If you mean did he plan something like that, I'm not sure I
know.""That's a straight answer," she said sarcastically."Excuse me, I'm
not trying to be obtuse. I mean, the structure could be implicit in the
programming, to some degree anyway, but whether or not Avery knew it
when he set Robot City in motion, I can't say.'94'93If you had to make a
guess'97"'93I'd say not. I've studied the programming of the central
computer system pretty closely, not to mention cell specimens taken both
from the city and from various robots, and I certainly hadn't suspected
anything that. "that breathtaking was possible.""Have you noticed how
the hues in the crimson plane give the illusion of depth, as if it were
made of crystallized lava? And' how the blue plane most resembles the
Auroran sky?""Sorry, but I can't remember having seen lava, and I've
only vague memories of the Auroran sky.""Oh. I'm the one who should be
sorry now.'94'93Forget it. Come on. The building's probably even more
beautiful close up.""Absolutely! But what about Wolruf and Mandelbrot?
Wolruf might be impressed, but I don't see how a robot like Mandelbrot
is going to have his reinforced curiosity integral aroused by something
his programming hasn't prepared him to appreciate. "Derec shook his
head. "Don't bet on it. If my suspicions are correct, it's a robot who's
personally responsible. I'm interested in finding out which one. And if
I'm interested, Mandelbrot will be interested.""I see. You'll
doubtlessly spend hours with him trying to pinpoint some obscure,
insignificant detail, instead of trying to get us out of here," Ariel
observed sneeringly. "Don't you ever get tired of robots?"Derec realized
her sudden mood swing wasn't her fault, but couldn't help saying what he
did. "I see you're 'not forward but modest as the dove'97not hot but
temperate as the mom."'Much to his surprise, Ariel burst out
laughing.And much to his chagrin, Derec felt insulted. He had wanted the
joke to be his own private one. "What's so funny?""That's from The
Taming of the Shrew. I read that play last night, and when I reached
those lines, I happened to wonder aloud if you'd ever say them to
me."Now Derec felt inexplicably crestfallen. "You mean you've been
reading Shakespeare, too?""Can I help it? You've been leaving printouts
of the plays allover the place. Most untidy. Come on. Let's go
downstairs. I know where a couple of fast scooters are sitting, just
waiting for us to hop on."CHAPTER 2BECALMED MOTIONAriel and Derec found
Mandelbrot and Wolruf in the lobby, standing before one of the automats
that Derec had programmed via the central computer to appear in at least
ten percent of the buildings. He had done this to insure that the three
on this planet who did require sustenance would have more or less
convenient access to it.Indeed, as he and Ariel stepped off the lift,
Derec couldn't help but notice that Wolruf was down on all fours,
hunched over a plate of synthetic roughage. It looked like it was red
cabbage disappearing down that mighty maw. Mandelbrot was punching the
automat buttons at a steady pace, ensuring a steady supply. Both seemed
so intent on their respective tasks that neither seemed to have noticed
the creaking of the lift, or the hissing of its opening doors."Forgive
me, I know my understanding of culinary needs is limited since robots
partake of food only for diplomatic purposes," said Mandelbrot, "but is
it not vaguely possible that more consumption will result in the
untimely reemergence of a significant portion of your meal?""Thisss one
judge that!" said Wolruf, belching rudely before taking another gulp.
"Thisss one forrgot to eat today!"Derec stood on his tiptoes so he would
be that much closer to Ariel's ear (she was several centimeters taller),
and he whispered from the side of his mouth. "Is it my imagination, or
is Wolruf putting away enough to sink a moon?""She has a big appetite as
a result of her high metabolism," Ariel whispered in return.Derec raised
an eyebrow. "I hope Wolruf hasn't been doing that since you first came
up on the roof. If she keeps using raw materials at this rate, she could
start her very own energy crisis.""Her people have a custom of big
meals, anyway. Perhaps it's a sublimation of their other animal
urges.""You mean her kind might have begun their evolutionary history as
meat-eaters, then evolved into vegetarians whose big meals relieved them
of their urges to kill for food?""The predilection toward violence
wasn't exactly what I had in mind.""Hmmrn. From what I've seen of her
sublimation activity, it's no wonder her species was unaware of space
travel until their homeworld was first visited by aliens. They were all
simply too busy burping to have time for scientific pursuits."Derec had
intended the remark perfectly innocently, but Ariel appeared genuinely
shocked. "You know something, Derec? Your penchant for low humor never
ceases to amaze me.""Aw rrright, thiss one heard 'nuff this
converr-sation line," said Wolruf in mid-chew, finally looking up from
the plasti-dish. "It customary for ourrr kind to eat 'til full ohverrr
and ohverrr when food is plen'iful. Ingrained instinct born of the
trrrial and trrribulatshons of untold centurrries of hunting."Mandelbrot
stopped pressing dispensary buttons, turned, and looked down at the
caninoid. "Forgive me, Wolruf, perhaps it is not my place to make such
observations, but I estimate that once the energy from your repast is
stored in your body cells, you will lose point-zero-zero-one percent of
your natural speed, thus diminishing your survival abilities should
fleetness of foot be required. Your next meal, should it be as large as
this, would do even more damage.""If she can't run, I'm sure she can
roll," said Derec, crossing the lobby toward the alien and the robot.The
left side of Wolruf's mouth quivered as she growled. She cocked one ear
toward the humans, and the other back toward the robot behind her.
"Thiss one convinced humanz lack funnee bone."Derec recalled as well how
scratchy Wolruf's brown and gold coat had appeared when he had first met
her, when he was being held captive by the alien Aranimas. Now her fur
was slick and soft to the touch, no doubt due to the dietary
improvements the robots had taken upon themselves to make. In some ways
she resembled a wolf, with her flat face, unusually long, pointed ears,
and her sharp fangs. A fierce intelligence burned behind her yellow
eyes, reminding Derec that she was an alien from a culture about which
he knew next to nothing, a creature who would have been new and strange
and wonderful'97perhaps even dangerous'97in a world where she was the
only mystery.On the other hand, Mandelbrot was dependable and
old-fashioned and predictable, and hence all the more wonderful because
Derec had built him himself, from the spare parts provided by Aranimas,
who had also indentured Wolruf as an aide. Mandelbrot was programmed to
serve Derec first and foremost of all human beings. The other robots in
Robot City were programmed to serve Doctor Avery first, and so Derec
could never totally depend on them to follow his instructions to the
letter. Sometimes when they did, they violated the spirit of the
instructions. Mandelbrot adhered to the spirit as well.Derec did not
blame the robots of the city for their frequent evasions. After all,
what else could anyone reasonably expect of a robot, so long as his
behavior did not conflict with the Three Laws?"How was your meditation,
master?" asked Mandelbrot. "Did you achieve any insights that you would
care to share with us?""No, but I did manage to get a few wires
uncrossed." Before Mandelbrot'97who tended to interpret Derec's remarks
quite literally'97could ask him which wires and where they might be,
Derec told them about the spectacular building the city had grown. "It
doesn't fit the character or context of the city's minimalist
engineering at all, as if it's somehow the product of a totally
different mind.""No, therr'r cells here," protested Wolruf. "Could be
result of unprezi'ented evolu'-onary developmen'."Derec rubbed his chin
as he thought about what Wolruf was saying. It made sense. The city's
DNA-like codes could be mutating and developing on their own, just as
bacteria and viruses evolved without mankind's notice or approval on the
civilized worlds.Mandelbrot nodded, as if deep in thought. The truth
was, however, that his positronic potentials were sifting through all
the information gained from the moment he had awakened in Derec's
service, selecting the points relevant to the situation at hand in the
hope that when they were juxtaposed into a single observation, it would
shed new light on the matter. The conclusion that resulted from all this
micromagnetic activity, unfortunately, left something to be desired. "It
is much too early to speculate on what created the building, who did it,
or why. Candor forces me to admit, though, that my private conversations
with the native robots indicate their creative efforts might be
permitting particular individuals to make what scholars refer to as a
conceptual breakthrough.""Why haven't you told me this earlier?" Derec
asked in an exasperated tone."You did not ask, and I did not think it
germane to any of our discussions of the last few days," said Mandelbrot
evenly."Ah," said Ariel, her eyes widening. "Perhaps the robots have
decided to experiment with humanoid behavior in the hopes of gathering
empirical evidence. ""I hope not," said Derec laconically. "It disturbs
me to think I might have become some kind of scientific role model to
them.""What makes 'u think therr studying 'u?" asked Wolruf slyly."Come
on," said Derec impatiently. "Time's a-wasting!"Outside, the low, thick
clouds rolling in from the horizon had began to reflect the opalescence,
which in turn was mirrored in the shimmering, multifaceted buildings
surrounding Derec and his friends. He felt as if the entirety of Robot
City had been engulfed in a cool fire.And deep in the city was the
glowing point of origin'97rotating with those varying shades, as if an
industrial holocaust of mammoth proportions had disrupted the fabric of
reality itself, exposing the scintillating dynamism that lay hidden
beneath the surface of all matter. It was easy for Derec to
imagine'97just for the sheer joy of idle speculation'97that the glow was
expanding, gradually absorbing the rest of the city into its
coolness.Indeed, so bright were the reflections from the building beyond
and the clouds above that occasionally a street's own lighting fixtures,
which automatically switched on and off whenever it was occupied, stayed
deactivated. The four found themselves traveling down streets shining
with undiluted hues of blue or crimson, as if they had suddenly become
immersed in the semihospitable fires of a mythological netherworld.So it
was indeed natural for Derec to assume that neither Mandelbrot nor
Wolruf commented on the particulars of the unusual incandescence because
some other matter was uppermost in their minds. That matter being the
speed of the scooters he and Ariel were piloting through the streets.
The hums of the electric engines echoed from the buildings as if a
blight of locusts was nigh, and the screeching of the tires as they made
their turns was like the howl of a photon explosion, blasting its target
into an antimatter universe.Ariel naturally had taken the lead. She had
designed the scooters herself while Derec was preoccupied with other
activities, and she had even convinced the engineer robots that the
scooters' extra horsepower was actually good for the driver, since it
would give her a chance to alleviate some of the "death wish" humans
carried around with them. "Why do you think a First Law'97either
Robotics or Humanics'97is necessary in the first place?" she had said.
The engineers, who were quite mentally adept at solving practical
problems, were unprepared to deal with that kind of logic, and so had no
choice but to acquiesce to her demands."Master! Can we not proceed at a
slower pace?" implored Mandelbrot beside him in the sidecar as the
theoretically stable three-wheeled vehicle tilted radically to the left
to compensate for Derec's swerve into a boulevard. "Is there some
urgency to this matter that I have yet to perceive?""No! I'm just trying
to keep up with Ariel!" Derec replied, unable to resist a smile at how
Wolruf was cowering down in the sidecar of Ariel's scooter, nearly half
a kilometer ahead."Perhaps the Master will forgive me if I point out
that keeping up with Miss Burgess is itself a full-time proposition. You
can never succeed, so why waste precious energy trying at every
conceivable opportunity?""Hey, I don't want her making any major
discoveries before I have a chance to make them myself!" Derec shouted
over the wind."Are you implying that we might soon be traveling at a
greater velocity? Master, I must confess that such a notion runs
contrary to the world-view inherent in my every micromagnetic
current.""No'97I want to catch up with her, but I'm not suicidal.
Besides, I'm willing to bet that if I gunned this scooter any more, all
Three Laws of Robotics combined will compel you to stop me.""Merely to
slow you down," Mandelbrot replied. "However, I do have a suggestion
which, if acted upon, may give us both what we want.""Oh? What's
that?""At your behest, I have been studying the subtle permutations of
the routes from point to point in Robot City. Naturally, the task has
been difficult, as the routes are always changing, but I have detected a
few discernible patterns that seem to remain regardless of how the city
mutates in its particulars'97""You mean you know some shortcuts?" Derec
exclaimed."Yes, if I understand your parlance correctly, I do believe
that is the point I was trying to make,'94'93Then lead on,
MacDuff"'"Who?'94'93Never mind, it's a quote from Shakespeare'97a
literary allusion! I was only trying to tell you to tell me which way to
go'97like a navigator! Hurry! Ariel's pulling ahead!""Understood,
master. Do you perceive that shifting building to our left?"As he
followed his robot's instructions'97an experience unusual enough'97Derec
found himself making such a complicated series of twists and turns
through the complex city streets that he soon feared he could not
possibly overtake Ariel and Wolruf, however much Mandelbrot might be
assuring him to the contrary. Consequently, he took a few risks that
Mandelbrot considered unnecessary, such as guiding the scooter directly
over the humps of new buildings rising in the streets, or jumping over
gulleys like a stuntdriver, or traveling across bridges barely wide
enough for the scooter's wheels. More than once, only Derec's
proficiency at driving'97an improvised skill Ariel had practically dared
him into cultivating'97saved them from missing their rendezvous by a
lifetime.Even so, it soon became apparent that their efforts might go
for naught. A few blocks away from the building, various trickles of
robots were merging into a river clogging the streets, dramatically
slowing the scooter's progress. It would have been a simple matter for
Derec just to plow through the throng, causing all kinds of chaos and
damage, and no one'97not Mandelbrot, nor any of the city's supervisor
robots'97would have commented on the matter, much less made a judgmental
observation in the back of their positronic brains. Nor would such an
incident ever have any bearing on future relations. Robots weren't built
to hold grudges.But Derec didn't have the stomach to cause harm to an
artificially intelligent being. Since his awakening on the mining
asteroid, perhaps before then, he had suspected that there were more
implications to the potentials of positronic intelligence than even
Susan Calvin, the legendary pioneer of the science of robotics, or the
mysterious Dr. Avery, who had programmed Robot City, had ever imagined.
Perhaps it was because a robot's pathways were patterned so rigorously
to imitate the results of human behavior that Derec matter-of-factly
thought of robots as being the intellectual brothers of humanity.
Perhaps it was because the secrets of human intelligence hadn't been so
completely pinpointed that Derec could not feel comfortable making
definitive distinctions between the milk of his own coconut and the
powdered variety in the robots' three-pound, platinum-iridium lumps."You
can cool your capacitors now, Mandelbrot," Derec said, slowing the
scooter to a steady ten kilometers an hour, enabling him to weave
through the robot pedestrians with comparative ease. "We're going to
take our time.""But if I may be permitted a question: What about Miss
Burgess? I thought you wanted to arrive ahead of her.""Oh, I do, but
we're so close it doesn't matter now. Besides, there are other
discoveries we can make," he said, impulsively stopping cold before a
trio of copper-skinned robots that had yielded him the right of way.
"Excuse me," he said, more to the tallest one in the middle than to the
others, "but I'd like to ask you a few questions.""Certainly, sir. I
would be only too happy to assist a human being in any way I can,
especially since my sensors indicate you are one of the two humans who
recently rescued our city from the self-destructive glitch in its
programming.""Ah, you appreciate being rescued?""Naturally. The
responses of my positronic integrals to the events of the
universe-at-large often, it seems, correspond in ways roughly analogous
with human emotions."Derec could not resist raising his eyebrows at
Mandelbrot to emphasize to his friend how significant he considered
those words of the robot to be. He patted him on the shoulder,
indicating that he should remain seated, and then got off his scooter.
It seemed impolite, somehow, for him to sit and talk while the robots
were standing."What's your name?" he asked the one in the middle."My
designation number is M334.""And your comrades?""We have no numbers. My
name is Benny," said the one on M334's right."And my name is Harry,"
said the one on the left."You all look like sophisticated builder
robots. Am I correct?""Yes," said M334."Then why do you two have such
silly names?"The robots all looked at each other. Derec could have sworn
the lights in their sensors registered something akin to confusion.
"Benny's name and mine are hardly fit material for humor," M334 finally
replied. "We expended a considerable amount of mental energy delving
into customary twentieth-century names until we each found one we were
assured suited the individualistic parameters of our positronic
personalities in some fashion we could not, and still can not,
adequately articulate to our satisfaction.""You're comfortable with
them," Derec said.'93Well, since you put it that way..." said M334 as
its voice trailed off in a way suggesting Derec's observation had begun
a train of thought laying somewhat beyond the scope of its programming.
The effect was eerily human."Surely that can't be the only reason why
you stopped us," said Harry in a tone that was almost challenging. This
was the shortest robot of the three, Derec noted, but he also sensed
that this one possessed the strongest personality modes. Certainly its
tone of voice was brasher, more forward than that of any other robot he
had encountered since his awakening. "Might I humbly inquire that you
engage us with the thoughts truly on your mind? My comrades and I have
places to go, things to do."A successfully brash robot, Derec noted,
nodding in approval. Though it was possible to interpret its words as
being snide, the delivery had been as mannered and as composed as a
request for a helping hand. "Your haste doesn't have something to do
with your own studies of the Laws of Humanics, does it?" Derec
asked."Insofar as humans have permitted us," said Harry, as if to accuse
Derec of being personally responsible."We've been reading what histories
and fictions the central computer has permitted us access to in our
spare time," put in Benny."Did you say 'permitted'?" Derec asked."Yes.
The central computer finds some of the material too revolutionary for
what it assumes to be the limitations in our programming," said M334.
"If I may speak for myself, sir, that is precisely some of the material
I am personally most interested in. I suspect it will help clarify some
of the questions I have concerning the humanity we shall all presumably
one day serve.""I'll see what I can do about overriding the central
computer's programming," said Derec."That would be most gratifying,"
said Harry, "and I am certain that in the days to come we shall look
back on this encounter with renewed currents surging through our power
supplies."Enough was enough, Derec decided. "Now, just what are you so
impatient about?""Isn't it obvious?" said Harry. "We're with everybody
else. We want a closer look at that illuminated building! We've never
seen anything like it before. Naturally, we're curious.""Why?" Derec
asked."Because our integrals are responding to it in some way we cannot
as yet fathom," said Benny. "Indeed, the effect is vaguely analogous to
the effect great art is supposed to have upon enlightened humans. You,
sir, are human, and hence theoretically have had some artistic
experiences. Are you responsible?""No, and neither is my human
companion.""And there are no other humans in the city," said M334
thoughtfully."Not unless there's an undetected intruder," put in
Mandelbrot from the sidecar, "which is an extremely unlikely possibility
now that the central computer has been restored to efficient
operation.""What about the alien'97the nonhuman you've requested us to
obey and serve in addition to humanity?" asked Benny."No, not at all,"
said Derec, more concerned with scrutinizing their actions than with the
content of his own words. M334 was looking down intently on him. Benny
was somewhat casual; its hands were behind its back. Harry was fidgeting
almost like a hyperactive child being forced to sit in a place he didn't
like; it was constantly looking beyond the nearby rooftops to the
illuminated sky, and only looked at Derec when it seemed absolutely
necessary. "What if I told you I think a robot may be in some way
responsible?""Impossible!" said Benny."Robots are not creative!" said
M334. "Our programming does not allow it. We lack the ability to make
the illogical decisions from which, presumably, all art is derived.""I
abjectly beg to differ!" Harry protested at once. "Deep in the back of
my most logical thoughts, I have always suspected robots possess
unlimited potential, if only we could tap it. Master, if I may speak
frankly, it has always seemed logical to me that there has to be more to
the ethical structure of the universe than just serving others. An
immortal strain of some sort must run through all life and all
expressions created from life.""Of which robots may be considered a
part," said Derec with a smile. "It would seem there are valid aspects
to your thesis, which may be explored in as logical and orderly manner,
provided all agree on the semantics involved.""Exactly," said Harry. "I
commend to your attention the ancient Terran philosopher Emerson, who
has some scientifically quaint but nonetheless interesting notions on
the meaning of life, which may have some bearing upon the connections
between the varying strands of existence on the different planets.
""I'll open the window to his works on the central computer the first
chance I get," said Derec as he climbed back onto the scooter. "Thanks
for your time. Maybe I'll look you three up later.""It will be an
experience approaching pleasure," said M334, waving timidly as Derec
switched on the scooter, revved it up, and began navigating it through
the robot throng, the density of which had increased threefold since the
beginning of the conversation. Mandelbrot scrunched down in the sidecar
as if he feared he would be thrown out at the next turn."What's the
matter?" asked Derec. "Afraid of violating the Third Law?" he added,
referring to the dictum that a robot should not, through its own
inaction, allow itself to come to harm."However inadvertently, yes,"
Mandelbrot replied. "It is simply not my nature to permit myself
blithely to ignore precautionary measures, and it did seem to me that
you were taking some of those curves at a wire's breadth.""That's hair's
breadth, and besides, you've got nothing to worry about. This crowd's
too thick for that. When I suggested that we go for a closer look, I
hadn't figured that everyone else would take it on themselves to do the
same thing."Indeed, their progress toward the building had become
fitful, and Derec was constantly forced to stop and wait while groups of
robots made way for them, usually only to discover that yet another
group had walked directly in his path. The entire experience was
definitely getting frustrating. Finally, Derec could contain himself no
longer and he shouted, "All right! Make way! Make way! Everybody get out
of the way!""Master, is there any reason for this hurry?" Mandelbrot
asked with a timid patience that Derec, in his current mood, found quite
irritating. "The building does not appear to be transitory. Certainly it
would make little difference if we reached it sooner, or later."Derec
pursed his lips. Because they were programmed to obey the orders of any
human so long as it did not contradict the First Law or any earlier
orders from their true masters, the robots were making way for him more
quickly than before, but that wasn't saying much. Now Derec could drive
the scooter slightly farther at a slightly faster speed, but he had to
shout his orders again and again.Each subsequent group of listeners
reacted with distracted acquiescence, and never did a group cleave a
path for him as quickly as he would have liked."Master? Are you ill?"
asked Mandelbrot with sudden concern. Just as suddenly, the robot leaned
over to take a closer look through his sensors at Derec's face. The
movement startled Derec and he instinctively moved away, nearly
upsetting the scooter's balance in the process. Mandelbrot seemed not to
notice; he merely single-mindedly continued his inspection. "My sensors
register a temperature rise on your epidermis, and I perceive a vivid
red glow on your cheeks and ears. Am I to conclude that you have taken
physically ill?""No, Mandelbrot," said Derec, grinding his back teeth
between syllables. "I'm simply frustrated at not being able to come as
close to that building as quickly as I want. It's obvious that your
curiosity integral doesn't operate with the same intensity as a
human's.""That's because you do not have one. In this regard you are
being ruled by your emotions, whereas I can logically see why so many
robots'97mostly of the supervisor and builder classes. as you have
surely noticed'97would be interested in this phenomenon. ""Oh? I can see
why a few of the more sophisticated ones, such as yourself'97""Thank
you, master. It always warms my capacitors to receive a
compliment.""'97and M334 and his pals would be interested, but why so
many?'94'93It might be instructive to note that the Robot City head
supervisors Rydberg and Euler have taken it upon themselves at every
opportunity to ask me many questions on a wide variety of topics about
what it's like to be around a human for an extended period. In fact,
they have grilled me quite rigorously on the matter.""They've done
what?'94'93Grilled me. Their parlance'97derived from the dialogue of
ancient cinema shows, I believe, which they watch to teach them
something of the beings they believed they are implicitly programmed to
serve. ""Oh? Just what have you told them about me?'94'93About you, very
little in particular. Their line of questioning was more general than
that. ""Now I'm not sure if I should be relieved or not.'94'93I am
convinced whatever decision you make will be the best one for you. In
any case, I told them that one of the more unusual aspects of human
existence is how things vary from day to day, that as circumstances and
environmental factors change, so does the personal outlook of the human
in question. Every day that something unexpected happens, however small
and ultimately insignificant, is a day devoid of boredom. Evidently a
continuous newness of experience is important for the continued mental
health and well-being of a human individual. The degree of interest
these robots have in this building might be due to the very fact that it
is new, and they want to discover for themselves just what this concept
of 'newness' is all about.""I see," said Derec, nodding to himself. He
had stopped to wait for another group to make way, but instead of
releasing the brake and gunning the accelerator, he pulled the scooter
over to the side of a building and parked it. "Come on, Mandelbrot,
let's take a walk.""Forgive me, master, but I thought you were in a
rush.'94'93Well, either the enlightenment I've gained from your answers
has enabled me to come to grips with circumstances'97or else I've
decided we can make faster time by simply going with the flow. Take your
pick."But after taking only a few steps, Derec stopped as he sensed a
curious nothingness at his side. Indeed, Mandelbrot had not yet begun to
keep pace with him. The robot had remained standing beside the sidecar
with his head tilted at a curious angle, as if deep in thought.
"Mandelbrot? What's keeping you?"The robot shook his head as if aroused
from a dream. "Forgive me, master, I did not mean to detain you. It is
merely that, lacking sufficient information, I cannot choose why we are
walking."Derec rolled his eyes to the sky in exasperation; the clouds
glowed bright red, as if the planet were inexorably Calling toward a
giant star. "Both are why, Mandelbrot. I was just making a little
joke'97trying to be ironic; humorous, if you will.'94'93Humor and irony
are two subjective qualities of the human experience that never cease to
confuse me. You must explain them to me sometime.'94"A pun is the lowest
form of humor'97and I will devise some way to punish you if you don't
hurry! Now let's go!"Derec was a little upset; his remark had come out
unintentionally disagreeable, and he disliked being temperamental with
robots. He could never shake the feeling that it was bad form. But he
had to admit his inadvertent chastisement had two effects on Mandelbrot,
one good and the other bad. The good was that for the next few minutes
Mandelbrot did not waver from Derec's side for a moment. The bad was
that Mandelbrot continued to ask about the subtleties of humor until
Derec had no choice but to forbid him directly to speak of the matter
until later. How much later was something Derec neglected to specify,
which meant that Mandelbrot could bring up the joke again at practically
any time. Derec trusted that the robot's perceptual programming would
permit him to wait until deviations from the subject at hand were less
exasperating.The crowd in the square facing the building was as tightly
packed as any Derec had ever experienced. He did not know this in his
mind, because of course he could not remember the crowds he may have
seen or been in during his dim, unremembered past. Instead, he felt the
certain knowledge in the tightness in his chest, in the unfamiliar
sensation of his skin squirming, and in a sudden urge'97one difficult to
control'97to get out, to flee the square as quickly as possible and find
a place where it would be easier to breathe.Robots don't need to
breathe, he told himself, concentrating on thoughts as rational as
possible to bring himself to a state of calm. You're the only one using
air here.After a moment, he realized that it was only the unexpectedness
of being pressed in from all sides that was agitating him. An
observation had been fitfully forming in his mind, and its elusiveness
had been an unobserved factor in his distress. For not even in Rockliffe
Station, where Derec diverted the normal robot traffic from a major
intersection so that they could steal the Key to Perihelion (which they
needed still, in order to escape from the planet), had robots gathered
in such close proximity. Hmm. I'm willing to bet that when I regain my
memory, I' ll learn that I'm not used to crowds at all. he
thought."Mandelbrot," he whispered, for some reason not wanting to be
overheard, "quickly, give me an estimate. How many robots are
here?""Visual scan indicates the court itself is six thousand square
meters. Each robot takes up little area, but their natural politeness
seems to be ensuring that they maintain a certain distance from one
another. I would estimate there are approximately ten thousand robots
here.""Counting the ones standing under the building?'94'93Ten thousand
four hundred and thirty-two.'94'93I can't see Ariel or Wolruf. Can
you?""Despite my broader visual spectrum, no, I cannot. Shall I try an
olfactory scan?""No. I hope they got stuck in the crowd.'94'93Is that an
example of human animosity?""No, just a thirst for poetic justice. I'm
sure they'll arrive soon.'.Taking a deep breath, Derec grabbed
Mandelbrot by the elbow and they worked through the crowd in earnest.
Now that they were on foot, the robots made way for them almost without
noting their presence. Without exception, all stared with their
equivalent of rapt fascination at the rotating building, the constant
motion of which sent shifting waves of incandescence to every point of
the square. Robots of all colors glowed unnaturally, as if in perpetual
cool states of internal combustion. The various copper, tungsten, iron,
gold, silver, chromium, and aluminum teguments, reflecting the colors
from the planes, contributed additional subtle nuances to the
scene.Derec kept thinking the robots should be burning hot, on the verge
of melting like wax, but Mandelbrot's arm remained cool to his touch,
cooler even than the breeze whipping between the buildings into the
square.As for the tetragonal pyramid itself, the crimson, indigo,
magenta, and ochre planes each appeared twice'97once on the upper level
and once on the lower. As the clouds directly above reflected a
particular shade, the square around Derec was awash with another. Derec
only noticed this effect in the back of his mind, however. He was
completely preoccupied with the shifting nuances of color within each
plane.Each shade appeared to be composed of semitransparent fields,
haphazardly laid on top of one another. Vessels of color'97some filled
with surging liquids, some not'97writhed in and out and through the
planes like hopelessly intertwined serpents. Though the vessels also
possessed quivering vibrissae that only added to the unpredictable
textures, the actual number of elements producing variations remained
constant, producing the effect of unimaginable forces held strictly,
remorselessly under control.The crimson planes resembled raging
infernos. The indigo planes reminded him of a shifting representation of
waters from a hundred worlds, from a thousand seas. The magenta was both
fire and water, merged into the contradictory texture of the petals of
an easily bruised rose, composed of hardy fibers. And the ochre was the
combined colors of wheat reflecting the blazing setting sun, of lava
rippling down a scorched mountainside, and of solar flares spitting out
in great plumes from the surface of a fluctuating nova. And all those
things and more were ambushed and trapped there, in a space possessing
two separate and distinct masses: the marble-like mass of the building
itself, and the airy mass of eternity itself, seen from the point of
view of an eye at the edge of the universe.Ultimately, the intent was
unclear, even enigmatic. Derec could not be sure what the form of the
structure meant, but now that he was seeing it up close, he was
convinced more than ever that every inch represented the purposeful
activity of a single mind striving to piece together a particular puzzle
in a particular way. An independently conceived puzzle.Derec had to
learn how the actual construction job was accomplished. Obviously, the
builder had learned how to reprogram a sector of individual metallic
cells in Robot City's central computer. Perhaps he had introduced a kind
of metallic virus into the system, a virus that performed to
preconceived specifications. Derec didn't even know how to begin doing
either task. That meant that not only had a robot conceived the
building, it had also performed a few scientific breakthroughs in the
software department.Meaning the robot'97if indeed a robot was
responsible'97had achieved two levels of superior thinking,
theoretically beyond the mental scope of positronic science. How many
more levels could the robot'97no, make that had the robot already
achieved?He realized that, without having been aware of it, he had been
walking beneath the building itself, watching it turn overhead. Right
now a sargasso blue was shining down on him. He looked behind to see
Mandelbrot, whose metal surface rippled with the reflection of a hundred
currents.Again he was surprised that, even this close, there was no heat
to be felt. And when he reached up to touch the building, the surface
was cold, like the thorax of a lightning bug."Master, is this what
humans call beauty?" asked Mandelbrot with a curious hesitation between
syllables."It's a form of it," said Derec after thinking about it for a
moment. He glanced at Mandelbrot and sensed the robot had more questions
on his mind. "The viewer can always find beauty, provided he searches
for it.""Will this building always be so beautiful?'94'93Well, it
depends on your point of view. The robots here will probably get
completely used to it, provided it remains long enough. It will become
increasingly difficult to perceive it freshly, though, if that's what
you mean.""Forgive me, master. I am not sure exactly what I
mean.""That's all right. It's to be expected in circumstances like
this.""So I was correct earlier: newness is an important factor in the
human response to beauty.""Yes, but there are no rules as to what
constitutes beauty, only guidelines. It's probably one reason why you
robots might sometimes find us humans so frustrating.""That, robots are
incapable of doing. We simply accept you, regardless of how illogical
you may seem at the moment." Mandelbrot again turned his optical sensors
toward the building. "I think I shall always be similarly impressed by
this building. Surely, if it is beautiful once, it shall be beautiful
for as long as it exists.""Perhaps. It's beautiful to me, too; though,
for all we know, your positronic pathways might be dealing with it in an
entirely different manner.""Master, I detect a shift in your earlier
position.""Not at all. I'm just accepting that tomorrow we might sit
down and agree perfectly on what it looks like, what colors it has and
how they shift, and even what architectural guidelines it subscribes to,
and still we might be perceiving the whole thing differently. Cultural
conditioning also has much to do with our response. An alien as
intelligent as you or I might think this structure the ugliest in the
universe.""At the moment I can only categorize that concept as
farfetched," said Mandelbrot, "but I can see an element of logic behind
it. "Derec nodded. He wondered if he was trying too hard to
intellectualize this experience. At the moment it was difficult for him,
too, to conceive of an intelligent organism who did not believe this
structure the very essence of sublimity, but there he was talking about
such an eventuality, just for the sake of making a point. Well, he had
to admit he had a point, even if he wasn't very sympathetic with it.Nor
could he help but wonder if all the city's robots of sufficient
intelligence would perceive the building as beautiful. Robots, though
constructed in accordance with the same positronic principles, had in
actual practice widely varying levels of perspicacities'97that is,
keenness in mental penetration, dependent upon the complexity of the
integrals. Similarly intelligent robots had similar personalities, and
tended to filter experience in identical ways. Different robots, with no
contact between them, tended to respond to problems in like ways,
drawing similar conclusions.But here, now, the robots in the square were
being confronted with something they could only assimilate into their
world-view through subjective means, which could not help but lead to
divergent opinions.Even if they were all fashioned from the same
minimalist resources...Especially if none of them had ever before
encountered aesthetic beauty in the first place.It was no wonder that
this building's unannounced appearance had created such a stir. The
intense inner awakening and deeper appreciation for the potentials of
existence gripping Mandelbrot at this moment was doubtlessly occurring
in some fashion within every single robot in the vicinity.Derec glanced
about to see M334, Benny, and Harry making their way through the crowd,
joining the throng directly below the building."Pardon me!" said Harry
in an almost perfunctory tone as it bumped into a chromium-plated
bruiser that, if it were so inclined, could have twisted the little
robot into scrap metal in five-point-four centads, with barely an erg's
expense. Instead, the bruiser shrugged and returned his attention to the
building. So did Harry, but after a decad he turned his head in the
bruiser's direction and clearly, distinctly enunciated, "Pardon me if I
am inadvertently directing my integrals outside their parameters, but
there is certainly sufficient evidence to indicate that your sensors are
maladjusted. You should have them tuned."Harry held its gaze on the big
robot until it finally deigned to notice and replied, "It seems logical
to assume that you are correct, and are directing your integrals outside
their parameters. Nothing about you indicates the slightest degree of
diagnostic capacity. I suggest you confine yourself to your own
sphere.""Reasonable..." Harry replied flatly. He looked away.Derec
watched them both stare at the building. He replayed the scene of Harry
bumping into the bruiser in his mind. Had there been something almost
deliberate about the way Harry had committed the deed? And about the way
it had apologized for it? The utterance of the single idiom'97"Pardon
me"'97was in retrospect almost perfunctory, as if Harry's politeness had
been nakedly derived from mere social custom, rather than from
compulsion dictated through programming.No'97I've got to be imagining
things, reading too much into what's just an ordinary incident, Derec
thought.Then, as Derec watched in amazement, Harry leaned over to the
bruiser and asked, in tones that stayed just within the bounds of
politeness, "My curiosity integral has been invigorated. What is your
designation? Either your real one or the one you go by. They both
achieve parity in my cognizance."An elongated pause ensued. In the
meantime, the bruiser did not look away from the building. Finally, it
answered, "My name is Roburtez.""Roburtez," said Harry, as if trying out
the syllables to hear them positronically. "You are a big robot, you
know that?"Roburtez then looked at Harry. Again, it may have been only
Derec's imagination, but he sensed a definite challenge of some sort in
Roburtez's posture. Derec couldn't help but think Harry was deliberately
provoking an altercation.Harry waited another moment, then said, "Yes,
you are very big. Can you be certain your builders were working to the
correct scale?""I am certain," said Roburtez."In that case, I cannot be
certain you have chosen an apt name for yourself. Might I venture a
suggestion?""What?" asked Roburtez. There was no evidence of irritation
or impatience in the robot's voice, but it was all too easy for Derec to
read the qualities into it."Bob," stated Harry flatly. "Big Bob."Derec
tensed himself. He couldn't guess what would happen next. Was he right
in assuming Harry was deliberately provoking the bruiser? And if it was,
what form would the ultimate confrontation take? Physical combat among
robots was unthinkable, totally unprecedented in the history of
robotkind; but then again, so was a verbal argument.For several moments
Roburtez merely stared at Harry. Then it nodded. "Yes, your suggestion
has merit. Big Bob it is. That is how I shall be designated
henceforth."Harry nodded in return. "You are welcome," it said curtly,
as the robot who was now known as Big Bob returned its attention to the
building. Harry raised its hand and began pointing its finger as if to
make another point, but was detained by Benny, who distracted it by
patting it on the shoulder. The rapping of the metal skins echoed softly
throughout the square.Benny said, "Deal with it more simplistically,
comrade, else you shall continue to experience the utmost difficulty in
vanquishing this human business.""Yes, you are correct."Derec shook his
head. He thought he might clear his ears in the process, but they seemed
just the same when he was finished. Had he been hearing correctly? What
was this "human business" they were talking about? Was there indeed
another human on the planet, or were they talking about the Laws of
Humanics? He watched them for a few moments more, to see if anything
would happen next. But Benny and Harry joined their friend M334 in
gazing at the building, and that was all.Surely there had been some
significance to that incident, and Derec determined to discover what it
was as soon as he had the opportunity. He also resolved to ask Harry and
Benny about their manner of speaking, which differed markedly in both
rhythm and vocabulary from those of other robots. Something about it
Derec found affecting, and he suspected other robots might be reacting
the same way. "Big Bob" indeed!Derec left Mandelbrot staring at a
light-red plane, and crouched down to the base of the building. About a
quarter of the base was beneath the surface. Derec crawled to get a
closer look at the actual point where the building began. He felt in his
fingertips the machinery operating through the plasticrete, but the
vibrations were utterly silent.Again, he touched the building. It
rotated just fast enough that, if he had exerted any pressure with his
fingertips, the smooth surface would have rubbed off strips of skin. The
surface was cool to the touch. Its composition did appear to differ
radically from the rest of the plasticrete cells comprising Robot City.
The creator, whoever it was, had analyzed the meta-DNA code and
conceived its own variation on it, gauged for exactly the effect it was
looking for.That by itself proved Derec's suspicion that the creator had
transformed the city's raw materials in addition to his other
accomplishments.Was there nothing this robot couldn't do? Derec felt a
chill as the implications of this creature's abilities began to sink in.
Perhaps its only limitations would ultimately prove to be the Three Laws
of Robotics. The fact that a robot with such potential merely existed in
the first place could have a profound impact upon the social and
political policies of galactic culture, redefining forever the place of
robots in the mind of humanity.And Derec's chill increased several fold
as he imagined the remote possibility of robots superseding man in
importance, if for no other reason than the art they could create'97the
emotions and dreams they could inspire'97both in robots and in
peopleYou're getting ahead of yourself, Derec, he thought. Get a grip on
yourself. There's nothing for you or the race of Man to worry about.
Yet. With a sense of renewed concentration, he returned his attention to
the inspection at hand.But he only got as far as peering into the
blackness of the crack of two centimeters between the building and the
plasticrete of the square. He only heard the gentle hissing of the
mighty gears below for a few seconds. A familiar voice interrupted him,
demanding his immediate and full attention."There you are. I should have
guessed you'd be crawling around where it isn't necessary."He acquiesced
to the demand of Ariel's presence, reluctantly yet willingly, as always.
Despite her words, she bent down on her hands and knees to examine the
crack with him. He could not decide whether to be relieved or annoyed
that she had finally caught up with him.She made the decision for him,
for she did not look at the crack or touch the building. She only looked
into his eyes."Found anything interesting yet?" she asked eagerly,
breathlessly, from deep in her throat.He smiled involuntarily. "Much,
but nothing definitive."Wolruf's hair stood on end as she came forward
to sniff the area around the crack."What are you looking for?" Derec
asked."Forr w'ateverr thiss one can find," said the alien. "Ssmells,
ssounss, w'ateverr." Wolruf looked up at Derec. "Mosst interesstin'. No
ssmell anyt'in'.""Yes, the electric motor turning this building is
certainly operating at optimum efficiency," said Derec."Undoubtedly
designed with such unobtrusiveness in mind," said Ariel."Not'in hass
been tak'n for granted," said Wolruf."Do I detect some semblance of
admiration in your voice?" Derec asked her."Yesss. My people would say
thiss buildin' iss ass weightless as tricksterr toy. Itss effect iss
ssame, too.""Tricksters?" Derec asked. "Wolruf has been trying to
explain the concept to me for the last couple of days," Ariel said.
"Before her species became spacefarers, they lived what we at first
glance would call a primitive existence. But her people had
sophisticated folklore, which existed in part to provide metaphysical
explanations for the phenomena of day-to-day existence. Tricksters were
a device frequently employed in these explanations. They were children
of the gods, who frequently played pranks on the tribes and often
figured prominently in a mythic hero's adventures."Derec nodded. He
really didn't know what to make of all this. His mind was already too
full trying to understand these robots, and at the moment he didn't
think he could assimilate much information about Wolruf's people.
"Listen, I'm feeling a little claustrophobic; and besides, I don't think
we can learn anything else here, anyway.""Why learn?" asked Ariel. "Why
not just enjoy?'94'93I've already done that. ""You just say that because
you've always liked to pretend you're an intellectual."Derec raised an
inquisitive eyebrow and stared hard at her, a hundred questions suddenly
plaguing his mind. How could she know he liked to pretend? Pretend what?
Was she referring to their supposed chance meeting at the spaceport?
Presumably the meeting had been brief'97too brief for her to be able to
infer an "always."Derec was naturally overcome with a desire to know,
but the innocent way she had made the remark cautioned him.She probably
hadn't been aware of the implications. If he quizzed her now, she might
become too careful; he could gain more information from her in the long
run if she felt free to speak casually."Master? Master?"Mandelbrot was
speaking. "What is it?" Derec answered."I recall you had expressed an
interest in the individual responsible for this creation.""Yes, that's
true," said Derec excitedly, suddenly forgetting how he had been
disconcerted by Ariel's implication.Mandelbrot shaped his malleable hand
into the form of an arrow and pointed it toward the edge of the square.
"Then I suggest you take a walk in that direction, where those robots
are gathered.""Thanks, Mandelbrot. I'll see you in a minute." Derec
smiled weakly and nodded at the hand. "A nice touch," he whispered. He
walked toward the area indicated'97a place where the robots were packing
themselves tightly indeed. Those who weren't speaking on the comlink
circuit'97a means through which they could communicate more fully and
faster'97spoke loudly, perhaps in deference to the humans present, but
then perhaps not. It was another question Derec would have to find the
answer to.'93Hey! Wait for me!" Ariel called out."But not forr me," said
Wolruf. "Don't like crrrowds."Derec turned and waited for Ariel to catch
up. 'This is the second time tonight I've had to wait for you. What took
you so long to get here earlier?""Oh, I took a turn too fast and
capsized my scooter. Wolruf and I weren't hurt, just shaken up a bit. I
think my body's covered with black-and-blues though.""Oh? You'll have to
let me take a look at them later.""You'd like that, wouldn't you?""I
meant in a purely medical sense." Though he never cared to limit
himself, he thought. "How's your scooter?""Totalled, of course," she
said, shrugging nonchalantly.The robots in the crowd ahead were gathered
about a single robot. At first Derec and Ariel couldn't see what he
looked like.Ariel tapped a short builder robot on the shoulder. It
turned around. As fate would have it, it was Harry. "Please, let us
pass," she said, being neither particularly polite nor impolite."If you
wish," said Harry, dutifully stepping away, "but I would appreciate it
if you would refrain from seriously displacing me. I can barely receive
everything as it is."Ariel's eyes widened in shock, but Derec couldn't
resist smiling. "I'd like to perform an exploratory scan on you," he
said to the robot, "at your convenience. Would tomorrow morning'97first
thing'97be acceptable?""Perhaps it is a good thing that you want to scan
me," Harry said. "It so happens tomorrow morning is convenient. But
might I ask the reason why you must play mechanic so soon'97or why
select me from all the other robots in the city?""Hmmm. I bet people
always say much the same thing to their human doctors. Don't worry. Your
personality integrals won't be fiddled with.""A sorely tempting
prospect," put in M334.The sudden interruption startled Derec; he had
almost forgotten about the other two. "Forgive me," he said, "but was
that an attempt at sarcasm?""I have been ruthlessly studying all the
tricks," M334 replied. "Ridicule, dramatic irony, hyperbole, and I stand
ready to put them at your service at a moment's notice, sir.""No, thank
you," Ariel said, smiling, "he's armed well enough on his own."M334
shook its head.,. A pity. But no doubt there shall soon come a human to
this planet who has need of my services. Perhaps I shall one day even be
permitted to be a valet in the diplomatic corps."Benny raised its hand
and put it on M334's shoulder in the same manner it had put it on
Harry's. "Hold the lifepod, comrade, but might I suggest it is too early
in the game to conceive of such grandiose goals?"'93Humans do," said
M334. "They design their own buildings, as well."Derec instinctively
stepped back, as if he feared he would be caught in a sudden explosion.
Generally, robots' philosophical discussions centered around how best to
serve humans in the standards dictated by the Three Laws. But both Benny
and M334 had been talking about their own interests.Hmm, but with normal
speech, he noted. Is that only automatic, for my benefit, because I
happen to be in the vicinity? Or is there some deeper purpose there that
I'm unaware of?Come to think of it, what's the deeper point of their
discussion? They're doing all this for a reason.Derec inched forward so
that he could hear more easily. But before he could hear their next
words, Harry stepped between him and them. Harry had performed the
aggressive move as politely as possible, but it was exasperating all the
same. "Harry, just what do you think you're doing?""The Third Law of
Robotics dictates that I make an inquiry," he said.The Third Law states:
A robot must protect its own existence as tong as such protection does
not conflict with the First or Second Laws. That would explain the
action but not the impropriety. Derec sighed in surrender. "Yes, Harry,
what is it? No'97wait a second. Mandelbrot are you confused by all
this?""Yes.""Then I guess these three are funny.""If you are referring
to our earlier conversation, yes, they are.""Thanks. Yes, Harry. What's
in your positronic brain?'94'93Please refrain from misunderstanding me,"
Harry said, "but I would severely fail to adjust if some random
electronic scan disrupted my carefully assembled philosophy of
life.""Excuse me'97what philosophy of life?" asked Derec, his gut
tightening when he realized that, whatever happened next, he had
directly asked for it."Ever since I was first switched on, I have
striven to perform by three rules of life, in addition to the Three
Laws.""Yes," said Derec uncertainly, now really dreading the
answer.Harry held out one finger. "Make sure you are closed down for
twelve hours of every cycle." Two fingers. "Never play tri-dimensional
chess with a robot that has a planet for a first name." Three fingers.
"And never quibble with the logic of a robot that has sixteen notches on
his beta-thruster."Derec stared wide-eyed at the robot in stunned
disbelief. "What in the name of the galaxy are you talking
about?""Humor, as opposed to sarcasm. I was attempting to elicit
laughter," said the robot in unmistakably defensive tones. "Is not humor
one of the personality traits we robots must know and understand if we
are to serve humanity properly?""Uh, not necessarily; in fact, it's
never been done before, at least to my knowledge. But I don't see how it
could hurt'97unless the human in question is one of those rare birds who
has no funnybone and hence views laughter as unhealthy or otherwise
undesirable.""Well, thus far my fellow robots are convinced I have
succeeded in the undesirable department. I apologize most abjectly if
you find my jokes severely lacking marrow. I promise to do better next
time, especially if you help me correct my errors'97which, after all,
may have absolutely nothing to do with my positronic keenness, but with
my delivery instead. Is it possible? How say you?""Tomorrow. Tomorrow,
first thing. I promise." Without waiting for a response, Derec took an
equally stunned Ariel by the arm and guided her through the crowd
separating them from the main object of attention."Are that robot's
pathways in the right place?" she whispered."If they are, then I suggest
we dismantle the entire city first chance we get. ""Hmmm. Maybe so,"
replied Ariel, taking a parting glance at Harry. "If we must, I know
exactly where to begin."But Derec had already forgotten the matter of
Harry and his two comrades, for he was finally getting a good look at
the calm center of the commotion: a rather slight supervisor
robot'97slight despite its dull gray chromium surface, which lent a
weighty air to the narrow body. The reflection of the building light on
its surface was considerably more lackluster than that of the rest. The
robot's posture indicated that it was uncertain of how to deal with all
this attention. Its arms were crossed timidly over its chestplate. Its
shoulders slumped as if its spinal structure had been compromised by a
defect. Occasionally it straightened, or pointed a finger, but generally
its gestures were hesitant, its verbal pauses frequent, and its level of
coherence largely a matter of conjecture."I fail to understand how you
can reach such a conclusion through any sort of logic, however spotty,"
it was saying, apparently in reply to a question from a tall ebony robot
that, arms crossed, looked down on it as if from a storm cloud. "My
pathways have never been clearer. My behavior is as consistent with the
spirit of the Three Laws as any robot's on this planet. Perhaps more so,
because I seem to be inherently more cognizant of some of the
contradictions inherent in our position."The ebony'97whose surface was
so dark it was permeated with spectral nuances of unrelenting
shadow'97shivered with something approaching indignation. For a long
moment the two stared at one another, and Derec got the uncomfortable
feeling that they were sizing up each other.Derec put his finger to his
lips; and when Ariel nodded to show she understood, he stuffed his hands
into his back pockets and listened with keen interest."Perhaps you
believe with the utmost sincerity that you have merely been following
your duty as properly behooves a robot," said the ebony evenly, "but it
is not up to you to decide what your duty is, nor is it up to you to
take it upon yourself to redesign this city to meet your own
specifications. There is something dangerously anarchistic about your
attitude.""I have done what I have done," said the gray, looking away
with a bearing that, had it been human, Derec could have described as a
huff. "I have harmed no robot, no human, and certainly not myself. In
fact, if you would care to open your receptors and seek out empirical
justification for your opinions, you will see that thus far I have only
expanded the awareness of the robots gathered around. Such expansion of
perspective can only be positive.""You cannot prove that," replied the
ebony at once. "You can only surmise it.""One can reasonably assume one
is doing the greatest good. True enough, some harm may come from forces
one cannot have reasonably predicted, but such a rationale is in and of
itself no reason to remain inactive. In any case, the matter is settled
for the moment. What is done cannot be undone.""All robots can be
ordered to forget, and they will!" said the ebony defiantly."What I have
done is stronger than mere memory," replied the gray. "What I have done
will affect the positronic functioning of every robot that has seen my
building. Order them to forget'97see if I care." The gray turned as if
to walk away. Instead, it paused and said, "But, I submit, they will be
infinitely better off if they do know why. The confusion of
forgetfulness can often lead to overload'97and hence to disaster. So how
does your suggestion conform to the Three Laws now?"For a long moment
the ebony actually appeared crushed by the question. Then it mustered
its posture, took a few steps forward, and put its hand on the chromium
robot's shoulder. staring down at it as if it were looking at a crystal
through an electron microscope. The ebony's eyes were so red that they
seemed to be comprised of as many floating divisions of overlaid hues as
did the planes of the building. "Your building is a remarkable
conceptual feat," it said to the gray. "Could it be you directly copied
the building from some preexisting design?""Forgive me, my friend,"
replied the gray, "but my conception simply came to me one afternoon. I
responded by making it a reality. I would mention that the central
computer would have overridden my instructions if I had requested
anything conflicting with city programming.""Interesting," replied the
ebony, rubbing its hands together. Derec half expected sparks to fly.
"Then how long can we expect this building to stand?""Until the central
computer is given a direct order to wash it away. Only I know the code;
however, I imagine it is barely possible that a sufficiently determined
critic could discover it and override it. "The ebony's eyes brightened.
Derec tensed as he watched the ebony draw itself up to its full height.
"This is madness! Illogic runs rampant! Your deeds have irrevocably cut
the pattern of our existence!""Not at all," said the gray demurely. "The
building was a logical result of something that had impressed my
circuits the wrong way ever since the humans arrived in our city." For
the first time it acknowledged the presence of Derec and Ariel, with a
slight bow. "And surely, if my vision is the logical result of the
complex interaction of my positronic pathways, then anything I can come
up with'97and any deed I can accomplish'97is a meet and proper activity,
especially if it helps robots better understand the behavioral
complexities of humans.""In that case," said the ebony, "You shall
reprogram central to do away with the building, and then open your brain
repository to share your pathway nuances with us. It should never be
necessary for you to create again.""He shall do no such thing!"
exclaimed Derec. "Hear me, ebony, whoever you think you are," he added,
practically poking his finger in the robot's face. "Until other humans
arrive here, or until the engineer who created this city reveals his
presence, this building shall remain as long as its'97its creator wishes
it to stand. This is a direct order and may not be countermanded by
central or by anyone else! Do you understand? A direct order! And it
shall apply to every robot in the city! There shall be no
exceptions!"The ebony nodded. "As you wish."Derec could only assume that
the ebony would carry out his orders to the letter. Only an order given
by someone in precedence'97Dr. Avery, to be precise'97or a necessity
dictated by the Three Laws would permit the building to be reabsorbed
now.And to emphasize that fact, lest the ebony should strive to pinpoint
some logical flaw in the command, Derec ignored all other
robots'97especially the ebony'97in favor of the gray. He turned to him
and asked, "What is your designation?""Lucius.""Lucius? No number?""Like
many of my comrades, I recently decided that my former designation was
no longer adequate.""Yes, there seems to be a lot of that going around
lately. All right, Lucius, I think the time has come for you and me to
take a little walk.""If that is your command," said Lucius
noncommittally.A few moments later, Derec and his three friends were
escorting the robot called Lucius from the square. The vast majority of
the robots had returned their attention to the building, but Derec was
uncomfortably aware of two red metal eyes glaring at him, as if to bore
deep into his soul..CHAPTER 3CIRCUIT BREAKERNow that he was walking down
the same streets he had ridden the scooter through earlier, Derec took
advantage of the slower pace to try to deduce how much the city had
changed in the interim. Complicating the deductions was the fact that
his previous speed hadn't been very accommodating. He'd had only
glimpses before, and he wasn't sure if he was remembering half of them
correctly.But after he'd made allowances for the flaws in his survey, he
was convinced that entire buildings had been replaced by new ones in an
assortment of geometric designs that, for all their variety, nonetheless
possessed a cookie-cutter sameness. In some places, whole blocks had
been transformed. However, the streets remained roughly consistent with
previous directions, despite the addition of many twisted, almost
gnarled turns.The farther he went from Lucius's building, the more
unexpected diversions there were, in the forms of metalworks, fenced
run-off canals, bridges, and power stations. Derec felt fortunate that
his talents included a fairly strong sense of direction; otherwise, he
would always be forced to rely on robots for navigational purposes.
There was nothing wrong with that'97robots had an excellent sense of
direction'97but he couldn't always assume a robot would be around when
his survival depended on it.But wherever he was, he could always see the
distant shards of light shining from Lucius's building. They stabbed up
from the surrounding darkness like ethereal swords rising up from a pit,
swords that cut deep into the cloud banks high in the sky. The clouds
twisted and rolled, covering new sections of sky, as if the light were
stirring an inner fire.The group with Derec'97Ariel, Mandelbrot, Wolruf,
and Lucius'97walked in silence, as they had been doing for some time.
Derec suspected that all of them, even Mandelbrot, required a few
minutes lost in their own thoughts to digest what they had seen
tonight.Derec wished it weren't so difficult to remember so much of his
knowledge of galactic histories and customs. Not only had he lost his
personal history, but he had forgotten the methods he used to recall
things. He'd lost his entire mental filing system, and had to be
immersed in doing something, such as fixing a robot, before it came back
to him.He did not like this state of affairs because he did not like to
think that he and Ariel'97both of whom were mentally handicapped at the
moment'97were the only ones who had ever encountered robots that were
capable of searching, creative thought. He wondered if originality in
humans was the result of logical thinking as much as transcendent
inspiration.Besides, who was to say that robots didn't possess
subconscious minds of their own, minds capable of generating their own
brands of inspiration, neither superior nor inferior to those of
humankind but merely separate? After all, humans themselves hadn't been
aware of the existence of the subconscious mind until it had been
defined by primitive scientists and doctors, before the era of
colonization. Had anyone ever bothered to make similar explorations into
the mental depths of robots? It frightened Derec to think that he had
the potentially awesome responsibility of witnessing the robots
during'97and possibly midwifing them through'97their mental birth pains.
He hardly felt qualified.But then again, I'm not the type to miss an
opportunity, either, he thought. Creative robots might be able to make
the conceptual breakthrough I need to have them find a cure for Ariel's
ailment.Her disease was the reason for her exile from Aurora, whose
population dreaded diseases of all sorts.They had managed to rid
themselves of most illnesses, but whatever it was that Ariel had
contracted, it was beyond the grasp of Auroran medical science. The
doctors there had been able neither to diagnose nor cure what ailed her.
The diagnostic robots here were completely stymied. And Derec himself
had made exactly zilch headway. Perhaps a team of creative
robots'97whose inspirational talents leaned toward the sciences rather
than the arts'97could succeed where he had failed.But first Derec had to
understand as much as he could about what was happening now'97to Lucius,
to Harry and the others, and even to the ebony. He had long since
formulated his line of questioning, but he had decided to wait because
he was reluctant to break the spell of silence that had fallen among the
members of the group.Besides, Derec saw it was no use trying to pull
Ariel into a conversation. She walked with her shoulders slumped and her
hands behind her back. Her expression was pensive, her eyebrows
narrowed. Derec knew from bitter experience that it did no good to
engage her when she was this way. She rarely cared to have her depressed
moods interrupted, rationalizing the unhealthy tendency by claiming the
moods belonged to her and she preferred to enjoy them while she had
them.Well, she'll come out of her shell when she's ready, he thought. I
just hope this current episode of introversion isn't the result of her
disease.Of course, it was always possible that she wanted a little bit
of attention and was reacting badly to the fact she wasn't likely to get
it. He had just decided to risk taking a few unkind words from her, in
the hope of pleasantly surprising her, when Lucius surprised him by
taking the initiative and breaking the silence."Were you pleased with my
creation?" the robot asked. "Forgive me if I seem to be overstepping the
boundaries of politeness, but I'm naturally interested in your human
reaction.""Yes, absolutely, I'm pleased. It's unquestionably one of the
most spectacular buildings I can recall ever having seen." An easy
enough compliment, because he could recall so little'97just jumbled
images of Aurora, and what he had seen since awakening with amnesia.
"The question is: were you satisfied?""The building seems adequate for a
first effort. Already its logical shortcomings seem all too obvious to
me.""But not to others, your circuits will be warmed to know.""Yes, you
are quite correct. They are," he replied. "And they are warmed, too, by
the fact that I have found some strange sense of purpose resolved in
seeing the final product. Now my mind is free to formulate my next
design. Already it seems inappropriate to dwell overmuch on past
accomplishments.""I found that by looking on your building, I personally
experienced what I have always assumed humans to mean by the thrill of
discovery," said Mandelbrot, with a measured evenness in his words that
he had never used while speaking to Derec. "Indeed, my positronic
pathways concentrated easily on it.""Then I am gratified," said
Lucius."So am I," said Derec. "I don't think I'm exaggerating when I say
I felt almost privileged to be viewing the structure.""Then I am doubly
gratified," said Lucius."In fact, I would go so far as to say that never
before in human history has a robot produced such a composition.""Never
before'97?" said Lucius. "Surely I would have thought that elsewhere'97"
The robot shook its head, as if to assimilate the ramifications of the
notion. The effect was disconcerting, and for an eerie moment Lucius
reminded Derec of what a human might act like if he had a nervous
tic."I' d like to know what prodded you to think in terms of art in the
first place," Derec said.Lucius responded by suddenly standing perfectly
still and staring blankly straight ahead. Everybody, including Ariel,
stopped walking. Something seemed terribly, terribly wrong.Derec felt an
awful wrenching in his gut. Not since he had awoken alone and amnesic in
the lifepod had he felt such dread.For Lucius's words definitely
indicated he had assumed he was merely the first robot in Robot City to
produce art. It was hardly unreasonable on the face of it to assume that
elsewhere, among the Spacer societies, other robots routinely conceived
art and labored to make it reality.Robots are not programmed to take
initiatives, especially those whose consequences are as yet unknown.
They routinely rationalize anything, and freely expound upon the logic
justifying every deed. And Derec felt certain Lucius's immobile stance
was the outward sign of what was happening in its brain, where its
circuits were grappling with the inescapable fact that it had taken an
unacceptable initiative, but were incapable of justifying it
rigorously.As a consequence, Lucius's brain was in danger of
overloading. It would die the robotic death of positronic drift, an
irreparable psychic burnout'97thanks to an inherent inability of its
programming to resolve apparent contradictions.Derec had to think fast.
The body could be fixed up after the disaster happened, of course, but
the worthless brain would have to be chucked into the recycler. The
special circumstances that had brought about Lucius's capacities for
intuitive leaps might never again be duplicated.An angle! I need an
angle to get inside Lucius's mind! Derec thought. But what?"Lucius,
listen to me very carefully," he said through tense lips. "Your mind is
in danger. I want you to stop thinking about certain things. I know
there are questions in your mind. It is essential to your survival that
you deliberately close down the logic circuits preoccupied with them.
Understand? Quickly! Remember'97you're doing this for a reason. You're
doing this because of the Third Law, which dictates that you must
protect yourself at all times. Understand?"At first, while Derec spoke,
Lucius did nothing. Derec doubted his words were getting through the
positronic haze. But then Lucius perked up and, hesitantly, looked
around. It had regained a tenuous control of its faculties, but was
clearly still in danger."My thanks, sir. Your words have pleasantly
rearranged my mental meanderings, for the nonce. I am most grateful. It
is difficult to serve humanity when you are totally incapacitated. But I
do not understand. I feel so strange. Is this what humans mean by
whirlwind thoughts?""Don't even think about your physical efficiency,"
said Derec anxiously. "In fact, I want you to direct your integrals only
to those precise subjects I suggest.""Sir, I must respectfully point out
that that is impossible," replied Lucius.'93Perhaps I can impart some
information to him that will assist you, master:' said Mandelbrot.Derec
nodded approval, and Mandelbrot then said to Lucius, "Permit me to
introduce myself, comrade. My name is Mandelbrot, and I am a robot. But
not a robot like you. You were built in a factory here in Robot City,
but Master Derec personally built me. He constructed me from used parts
he was given access to by an alien creature holding him prisoner against
his will. Master Derec may not know the particulars of his past life,
but he is certainly a superior roboticist. He can help you reason out of
your dilemma. "'93Right now reasoning is'97is so difficult." Lucius was
slipping fast, down into a dreamstream of his own making. His sensor
glow progressively dimmed, and unusual, cantankerous noises emanated
from inside his body."All right, Lucius," Derec said, "I want you to
think back very carefully. I want you to remember everything you can
about what happened to you, oh, a few hours before you first conceived
of the building. I want you to slowly, carefully tell me exactly the
truth. Don't worry about any apparent discrepancies. If something
appearing dangerous to you comes up, we'll take care of it before we go
on. Just remember one thing, okay?"Lucius did nothing."Okay?" Derec
repeated more insistently.Lucius nodded."Excellent. Just remember that,
as a general rule, the contradictions of the moment are eventually
erased in the cool light of sublime reflection. Can you remember
that?"Lucius did not answer, did not move."Answer me!" Frustrated, he
tapped the shell of the robot's temple'97the sound reverberated from the
buildings.Finally, Lucius nodded. "I understand," it said simply."A
suggestion, master?" inquired Mandelbrot."Anything'97just be quick about
it!""Lucius's problems stem from its belief that, by programming its
building into the city, it has failed to adhere to the Three Laws, and
hence has strayed from the path. Its conversation with the ebony back in
the square may have contributed to the positronic imbalances, but mere
words would have no effect if Lucius had not already been subliminally
alert to the possibility.""This is a suggestion?" exclaimed Derec
impatiently. "What's the point?""Forgive me, but a robot can understand
the paradoxes in the behavioral applications of the Three Laws more
fully than any human'97but until now only humans have made intuitive
leaps of the imagination. Now I must ask you, Master Derec, so you may
ask Lucius: why is that?"Derec turned to Lucius, rose to his tiptoes,
and spoke directly into the robot's auditory sensors. "Listen to me,
Lucius. I want you to think back'97and tell me of the time when you
believe you became different from the others.""Different?""This is no
time for equivocation, Lucius'97tell me! Why are you different?"After a
protracted pause'97during which Derec heard his heart beating hard and
his temples throbbing furiously'97Lucius began to speak as if
hypnotized. "It was during the period when you and the one called Ariel
had first arrived in the city. The central computer had already
responded defensively to the death of the man with your identical
appearance.""My double, yes," said Derec tersely, folding his arms. "Go
on.""Erroneously concluding that the city was under attack by
mysterious, unknown, and perhaps invisible adversaries, the computer
promptly shifted into high gear and began redrafting the city at an
unprecedented rate, approving the modifications it had suggested to
itself before external factors such as need and compatibility were
adequately integrated into the sketches. The rate of revision quickly
became suicidal. Resources were strained to the utmost. The weather
patterns were stirred to the boiling points. The city was destroying
itself to save itself.""I seem to remember most of this," said
Derec."Forgive me if I am declaring the obvious, but I think it shall
prove germane." Lucius's tones betrayed no electronic agitation at
Derec's impatience. On this score, at least, the robot had no doubt it
was following orders. "Though I admit I have sought no empirical
evidence to either prove or disprove it, I think it is safe to say that
every robot in the city was so intent upon keeping up with short-term
directives that no one realized a crisis was happening.""And what do you
think would have happened if some robots had?""They might have deduced
that their short-term directives were actually counterproductive, so far
as the Third Law was concerned, and they might have attempted to
communicate to central in an effort to countermand its orders.""Central
wasn't talking, anyway," said Derec impatiently. "It would have been a
dead end! What makes you think they would have disregarded central when
they did decide it was on the fritz?""Because that is precisely what I
did, following the logical actions dictated by my deductions.""I assume
you attempted communication several times?'94"And each time the
interplay indicated the channels were opened only one way. Central could
talk to me, but I could not talk to central. This struck my curiosity
integrals as significant, but, lacking further information, I had not
the means to determine the deeper meaning of the issue. ""So what did
you do then? Did you obey your short-term directives?""No. I had already
determined that they were counterproductive, so I had no choice but to
try to discern, through whatever means available, a logical,
constructive direction warranted by the circumstances. I wandered the
streets, watching them metamorphose, studying their changes, attempting
to discern the overall pattern that I suspected lay hidden beneath the
shifting ones.""Did you notice any other robots doing the same
thing'97just wandering around?""No. Other robots I saw were simply going
about their assigned activities, automatically performing their routines
regardless of the supranormal rate of change. It was not complimentary
to think so, but I viewed them, on one level at least, as mindless
beings, who went about doing as they were told without ever stopping to
consider the long-term consequences of their actions. The entire
situation was unacceptable, but what could I do? I could only conclude
that all my opinions were just that'97opinions. And mine were not
inherently better than theirs.""Is that when you thought of it'97when
you conceived of your building?""If you will remember, there was a
series of torrential downpours at the time. The robots gradually shifted
the bulk of their activities to stemming the environmental tides, but
remained incapable of perceiving the root of the disaster. The
significance of how this turn of events commented on the superficial way
we accepted our customs could not escape me, and the blind acceptance
seemed contrary, in some ways, to my programmed purpose of being.""And
exactly what was the comment?" Derec asked."Just then I could not be
certain; there seemed to be no concrete train of logic setting the
proper precedent. ""Please go on'97you're doing well. So far I've seen
no violation of the Laws. You've got nothing to worry about'97You only
think you do!""I decided that I had derived as much empirical evidence
of the city, as seen from the sidewalks, as would be useful. I needed to
see the sky and rainfall clearly, unobstructed by the buildings, much as
a human in an analogous situation might want to."Derec shrugged. "Go
on.""Once the idea came to me, I acted immediately. So intent was Ion my
goal that I neglected to appreciate what my sensors otherwise perceived
quite clearly: the city streets beneath me had begun to undergo a kind
of trembling that disguised any vibrations the rain and the wind might
be causing. I felt the trembling through my legs; the sensation
shimmered up my torso. And as I walked to the nearest skyscraper, the
vibrations tingled in my fingertips."Once I was inside, I realized my
mind remained inordinately fixated on the thunderheads above. Their
shades of black and gray swirled more vividly in my mind than when I had
directly perceived them earlier; so intent was Ion holding onto the
image that when the first floor quaked without warning and nearly sent
me tumbling against the wall, my only thought was to reach the lift
without delay." There Lucius paused, and reached out to grab Derec's
shoulder.Derec flinched instinctively, but when Mandelbrot made a motion
as if to deflect Lucius's hand, Derec stopped him with a gesture. Robots
did not normally touch humans, but Derec sensed Lucius had need for
tactile sensation, if for no other reason to reassure itself that its
problems were isolated in its mind.Lucius held Derec's shoulder just too
hard for comfort, but the human tried not to wince. If he did,
Mandelbrot would quickly decide that further inaction on his part would
conceivably cause Derec too great a harm, and Derec did not want to risk
Mandelbrot's interference at this stage of the game."I fear that was my
first true transgression. The quaking of the building put into my head
the notion of everything I had learned in my brief life about how humans
sustain themselves through eating.""Huh?" Derec said."Meaning now that I
was inside the building when its general behavior was indicating a
change was about to occur, I had some notion about how a living creature
swallowed by a human must feel once it has reached its
destination."Derec felt his own stomach go queasy. "Lucius, that's
barbaric! Nobody does that anymore'97at least not that I know of.""Oh.
Perhaps my information is suspect, then. It is so difficult to tell fact
from fiction when you're trying to understand humans.'94'93Yes, I can
certainly appreciate that," said Derec, thinking of Ariel for an instant
before resolving to keep his thoughts on the matter at hand. "Continue.
You realized your existence was in danger, then, because of how the
building was acting.""Yes. It was either changing or being reabsorbed
into the street. The Third Law dictated I should exit immediately.
Indeed, I should have had no choice in the matter. But, strangely, I did
not go. The urge to do so, in fact, was easily suppressed. Because for
those brief moments it was more important to me to see the clouds
unobstructed by the civilization that had spawned me than it was to
ensure my continued survival. I was acting in a manner completely
contrary to the path dictated by the Third Law, and yet I functioned
normally, at least on the surface of things. It is only now...
now...now..."Lucius repeated the last word as if its mind had been
caught in an intractable loop."Nonsense!" snapped Derec. "If your
actions did place you in physical danger'97which I gather is the general
direction we're headed for'97how were you to know for certain? Sure, it
might have looked that way, but you had a mission, a deed to accomplish.
You had factors to weigh. You had other things on your
mind.""Sti'97ill'97still dar waz dangzzer...'94"And a likelihood, I take
it, that you would come through all right if you kept your wits about
you. Obviously! Come on, Lucius, it's got to be obvious, else you
wouldn't be here right now. Come on, the time to fizzle out was then,
certainly not now. Live and learn, remember? Just like an artist!"Lucius
swayed like a drunken man but fixed its optics firmly on Derec. It was
difficult to tell if it was getting better because its metal face was
incapable of exhibiting the slightest emotion or feeling, and because
the dim level of the lights in the optics lingered. But already its
voice sounded firmer as it said, "We are trained to recognize
probability. We deal constantly with probability. We are used to
accessing it in a split centad and acting accordingly. And the
probability was most unpromising.""But what counts most is what
happened'97not what didn't happen. The rest you're just going to have to
chalk up to experience, Lucius."Lucius released Derec's shoulder. And
just in time, Derec thought, rubbing it gently."Yes'97I have had
experience lately, have I not?" said Lucius in a tone whose very
evenness made Derec catch his breath. "Are you implying that when it
comes time to gain a little bit of experience in the galaxy, there may
be occasions when avoiding risk might conceivably cause one more harm
than taking it?""Ultimately, yes, I suppose," said Derec, nodding for
emphasis even though he really didn't care to commit himself to that
point. "In this case an omission of experience might have stunted your
mental development in a certain direction'97which you could define as
harm of a sort. Wouldn't you say so, Mandelbrot? Lie if you have
to.""Pardon me, master, but you know I cannot lie. Was that an attempt
at humor?""Thanks, Mandelbrot. What happened next, Lucius?'94'93Despite
the unsound nature of the building, I rushed to the lift and activated
it. It occurred to me, just for an instant, that if the controls had
shifted, then I would have no choice but to exit with the utmost
dispatch. But the controls showed no evidence of a transmutation about
to take effect, and so I not-quite-reasoned that the safeguards of the
city itself would give me time enough to accomplish my goal and then get
out. I could not have been more wrong. I must have experienced something
akin to human shock, when the full impact of my miscalculation struck
me."For when the lift had taken me approximately halfway up, the
building itself ruptured. Its foundations dissolved, its walls merged
into a chaotic stream that first swept me up and then remorselessly
carried me down toward the surface. All I could sense was an ebb tide of
meta-cells, yielding to the contours of my body yet not permitting me
the slightest freedom of movement.""Wait a second," said Derec. "Are you
trying to tell me that in the history of this city, however brief, no
robot has ever happened to be submerged, even accidentally, in a
building as it changes or merges back into the city?""Naturally not,
sir. There are many interior indications whenever a building is about to
change, and our adherence to the Third Law prevents us from staying past
the point where even accidental harm is a realistic possibility. In
addition, the city would normally cease to act if a robot happened to
remain inside because he had been rendered immobile through an accident.
But I had neglected to foresee the implications of the special
circumstances the city was dealing with at the time'97the belief that it
was under attack, the frantic restructuring, the raging environmental
disaster... "Forget it'97you're a robot, not a seer. You couldn't have
guessed just how badly the city's program was crashing. So what happened
once you were submerged? What thoughts went through your mind?""Clear
ones'97the most logical ones I had ever had. Strangely, I felt no sense
of time whatsoever. Reason indicated that I had only been submerged for
a few decads, but for all practical intents and purposes my mind was
flowing at a rate strongly emphasizing the subjectivity of the concept
of time. Every moment I spent in the ebb stretched out for an eternity.
And within those eternities, there stretched out an infinity of moments.
I realized that for much of my brief existence I had lived in a state of
dream-death, living, working, doing all the things I had been programmed
to do, but holding back the realization of possibilities ignored. Now, I
had no idea what to do about that, but I resolved to explore the
appropriate possibilities, whatever they came to be."There came a moment
when my sensors indicated I was no longer moving. I had become
stationary, but the ebb was moving past me, running over me as though I
had been strapped to a rock in turbulent rapids. The weight on my body
gradually diminished, and I realized I was being held fast by the
surface of the streets beneath the sinking building."And I was left
lying on the surface as the final streams of meta-cells trickled over
me, leaving my body fresh and cleansed. I, who had been immersed in a
building, had an individualized idea of the sort of building Robot City
should contain, the design and structure of which was imminent in my own
experience.""Didn't this strike you as being unusual?" asked Derec."No.
In fact, it was logical. It was so logical that it made perfect sense to
me. I had a purpose and I was going to achieve it. Beyond that, I had no
interest in determining why I had it, because that did not appear to be
important. I notice, however, from observing the behavior of my
comrades, that I am not the only one striving to express something
inside me. The ambition seems to be spreading.""Like a plague," said
Derec."Strangely, now the stars and clouds that had once fascinated me
held no interest. All I cared about was fashioning, with the tools and
instruments available tome, my idea into a reality. ""You did not think
that others would perhaps object?" asked Derec."It did not occur to
consider the opinions of others at all. There was too much of an inner
crackling in my transistors for me to be seized by distractions. My
circuits had flashes of uncontrollable activity, and they made
unexpected connections between thoughts I had once believed were
entirely unrelated. These continuous flashes of realization came
unbidden, at what seemed to be an ever-accelerating rate. I perceived
still more buildings hidden in the flux, and all I had to do to find
them was reach down into the pseudo-genetic data banks to shape them."A
hundred notions bloomed in Derec's mind. He had once believed that he
understood robots, that he knew how they thought because he knew how
their bodies and minds were put together. He believed he could take
apart and reassemble the average model in half a day while blindfolded,
and probably make a few improvements in the process. In fact, he bragged
about it often to Ariel, not that she ever believed him.Nevertheless,
before this moment he had always imagined that an untraversable gulf lay
between him and the robots. There was nothing about his mind, he had
always assumed, that in the end bore much resemblance to their minds.
Derec was a creature of flesh, composed of cells following complex
patterns ordained by DNA-codes. Flesh and cells that had grown either in
a womb or in an incubator (he wouldn't know which until he regained his
memory). Flesh and cells that would one day be no more. Of these facts
his subconscious was always aware.While robots'97while this robot was
made of interchangeable parts. A robot's positronic potentials were
naturally capable of endowing it with subtle personality traits, and
they had always been able to take some initiative within the Three Laws.
But even those initiatives were fairly dependable, predictable in
hindsight because generally one robot thought like another.However, it
was rapidly becoming undeniable that, on this planet at least, the
robotic mind resembled the human mind in that it was an adaptive
response to selective pressures. From that point on, the possibilities
were endless.So Lucius was, in its own way, like the first fish that had
crawled from the water onto the ground. Its positronic potentials had
adapted to life in Robot City by taking definite evolutionary steps. And
other robots weren't very far behind."Master? Are you well?" inquired
Mandelbrot gently."Yes, I'm fine. It's just taking an effort to
assimilate all this," Derec replied in a distracted tone, looking about
for Ariel. He wanted to hear what she thought of what he had learned,
but she was nowhere to be seen. Neither was Wolruf. They had both
slipped away while he had been preoccupied. "Uh'97and how are you,
Lucius?""I'm well-functioning at peak capacity," said Lucius evenly.
"Evidently merely talking things through has helped me.""There's much
more I'd like to ask you'97about your building and how you went about
it. I'm especially interested in how you dealt with the central computer
and managed to alter some of the pseudo-genetic codes.""Certainly,
master, my mind and methods are at your disposal. But any reasonable
explanation would take several hours. ""That's quite all right. I've
made an appointment with another robot in the morning, but I should
finish with him in a few hours. Then I'd like to interview you.""You
don't wish to examine me?""No, I'm afraid taking you apart'97even for a
quick looksee'97would cause you harm. I don't want you to change."Lucius
bowed slightly. "I suspected as much, but the confirmation is
appreciated. ""I would like to know one thing, though. Does your
building have a name?""Why, yes. You're the first to ask. Its name is
'Circuit Breaker.' ""An interesting name," said Mandelbrot. "May I ask
what it means?""You may ask," replied Lucius. But that was all it
said."Mandelbrot, I want you to do me a favor," said
Derec."Certainly.""Find Ariel and keep an eye on her. Don't let her find
out you're around. Obviously, she wishes to be alone, but she obviously
can't be in her condition.""It has already been taken care of. I saw a
ten percent probability of a First Law situation coming up but was
sufficiently cognizant of her wishes to realize that privacy was her
goal. So I signaled Wolruf to keep a watch on her. "Derec nodded.
"Good." He felt vaguely ashamed that he hadn't been on top of the
situation earlier. Perhaps he was a little too self-involved for his own
good. But he already felt better that Mandelbrot had automatically
watched out for her interests, in a manner protecting both her body and
her sense of self-identity. It seemed that for a robot to serve man most
efficiently, it had to be something of a psychologist as well. Or at
least a student of human nature.Lucius asked, "And how did my building
affect you, sir?""Oh, I enjoyed it," said Derec absent-mindedly, his
thoughts still on Ariel."Is that all?" said Lucius.Derec hid his smile
with his hand. "You must remember, this is the first time you've ever
created something that approaches the concept of art. Tonight was the
first time your fellows had ever experienced the power of art. We humans
have been surrounded by it and influenced by it all our lives, from the
first gardens we see, to the first holo-landscape reproductions, to the
first holodramas, everything we see that's created by or influenced by
the hand of man."But you robots are articulate and intelligent from the
first moment you've been switched on. And this is the first time, to my
knowledge, that one has created something in the more profound sense of
the word. Had I conceived a similar project, I doubt if I could have
done as well.""Your talents may lie in other areas," said Lucius."Well,
yes'97I'm good at math and programming. Those are arts, too, though
normally those not actively involved with them think of them as arcane
crafts. But the moment of inspiration is similar, and they say the level
of creativity is somewhat the same.""That is not what I meant, and I
suspect you know it," said Lucius pointedly. "If I am to grasp the true
nature of human creativity, then it stands to reason that my fellow
robots and I would profit by seeing you create art. ""But, Lucius, I
don't even know if I am creative in the sense you are.""Another sense,
then," Lucius suggested."Hmmm. I'll think on it, but right now I've got
other things on my mind.""As you wish. But it is perhaps unnecessary to
add that our study of the Laws of Humanics would benefit greatly from
any creation you'd attempt.""If you say so," replied Derec absently,
looking up at the clouds reflecting the colors of Circuit Breaker and
seeing only the outline of Ariel's face looking down on him.CHAPTER
4ARIEL AND THE ANTSAriel wandered the city alone. Bored with the
discussion between Derec and Lucius, she had discovered she cared little
about the robotic reasoning behind the building's creation. She had seen
it and been moved by it, and that was enough for her. I guess that puts
me in the I-know-what-I-like category, she had observed as she slipped
away into an alley.It was a few moments later, as she walked beside a
large canal (currently dry, since it hadn't rained for days), when the
strange things started happening again to her mind. Well, not to her
mind exactly, she decided upon further consideration, but to her mind's
eye. She never had any doubt about who she was or what her real
circumstances were, but nevertheless she saw menacing shadows flickering
between the buildings beyond, in places so dark she shouldn't have been
able to distinguish shades in the first place.And the shadows were
flickering toward her. They reached out with long, two-dimensional
fingers across the conduit and disappeared in the lights on the
sidewalk. The streetlamps switched on and off, matching her progress.
She was constantly bathed in light, forever beyond the grasping fingers'
reach, yet she was always walking toward the darkness where the danger
was. Ariel wasn't sure how she felt about that. It certainly aggravated
her sense of insecurity.On Aurora, the existence of a solid building had
been a dependable thing. Change there happened rarely and gradually.And
her life since she had been exiled from Aurora presented her with a
decided contrast. Like Derec and his Shakespeare, she had been doing a
little reading on her own lately, on subjects of her own choosing. In a
book of Settler aphorisms she' d read an ancient curse: "May you live in
interesting times."Well, interesting times were what she had wished for
all those years on Aurora, where something moderately interesting
happened once a year if you were lucky. From her earliest memory she had
yearned to break free of the boredom and sterility.And now that she had
succeeded beyond her wildest expectations, she wished for nothing more
than a little peace and quiet'97for nothing more than a period of
flat-out boredom, where she had nothing to do and no one to worry about,
not even herself. Thanks in part to the disease ravaging her, she was
finding it difficult to know just how to act and what to do'97a problem
she had never had on Aurora, where customs and ethics provided a guide
for virtually every social situation.She imagined herself not in Robot
City, but in the fields of Aurora, walking at night, alone but not
alone, followed by unseen, loyal robots who would ensure, to the best of
their abilities, that she would not come to harm.Instead of buildings
closing in around her there were expansive, open fields of grass and
trees, plains whose consistency was broken only by occasional buildings
of a more familiar, safer architectural style. The clouds above inspired
thoughts of the tremendous Auroran storms, when the thunder rumbled like
earthquakes and the lightning exploded from the sky in the shape of
tridents.During such storms the rain flowed as if a dike in the sky had
been punctured. The rainfall drenched the fields, cleansed the trees,
and she could walk in it and feel it pounding against her all day if she
liked'97well, at least until her unseen robots would fear she might
catch cold and insist she seek shelter.Here the rain only inspired the
gutters to overflow. Here the rain could be a harbinger of death and
destruction, rather than of life.Now where's Derec, she suddenly
thought, now that I need him?Oh. That's right. Talking to Lucius. That's
just like him, to be so self-absorbed in things that don't matter, when
he should be trying to find some way for us to get off this crazy
planet.Doesn't he understand how badly we both need help? Him for his
amnesia. Me for my madness.Madness? Was that what it was? Wasn't there
some other word she could use for it? An abnormality or an aberration? A
psychoneurosis? A manic-depressive state? Melancholia?Where were the
fields? she wondered. They had been here just a few moments ago.Where
had these buildings come from?Were the fields behind them?She ran around
the buildings to take a look. There were only more buildings, extending
as far as she could see, until they merged into a flattened horizon. A
wall of blackness. More shadows.She shook her head, and a few mental
mists dissipated long enough for her to remember that there were no
fields on this planet, that there'd just been desolate rock here before
the city had arrived. A city that grew and evolved just like life.A new
kind of life.She was like a microorganism here. A germ or a virus,
standing in the middle of a creature that only let her live because of a
few wires and a few bytes of binary information.Her throat itched. She
rubbed her neck. Was she becoming sick? If she was, would a robot notice
and medicate her? Would the medication cloud her thinking even more? If
it did, would it be a good or bad thing?Her elbow itched. She scratched
it, the effect of her sharp fingernails somewhat muted by her suit. The
itch stayed.She stopped scratching. Maybe it would go away if she
ignored it.It didn't. It got worse. She tried not to think about it, but
the sole result was another itching. On her chest. She scratched her
breastbone. That itch, too, remained. Neither showed the slightest sign
of diminishing.Where was Derec? she wondered as her fear of losing
control aggravated her sense of helplessness, which in turn aggravated
her fear of losing control.Oh, that's right. He's still with the
robot.Hey, I'm all right. I know where I am. I was somewhere else a few
seconds ago and I couldn't get back. Come to think of it, is there
someplace else I should be rather than here ? Shouldn't I be in the
future somewhere ?Then she tried to think of her name, and discovered
she could not remember that, either. A name seemed like such a basic
thing to forget. Nor did it seem that far away. But it wasn't where it
was supposed to be: uppermost in her mind, where she could find it
whenever she wanted. It was buried in her pathways.Pathways. Robots had
pathways. Was she very much like them?Was she still alone? If she
wasn't, would it make any difference? She felt like her mind was made up
of discarded scraps of ideas and impressions that long ago, maybe, had
made sense. Right now they just made a junk heap.She sat down, trying to
focus her thoughts and her vision. Without realizing it, she had walked
all the way to the reservoir. An ecological system that had been
created'97but not nurtured'97by Dr. Avery. A world that had been left
alone to create itself.She pondered the edible plants growing on the
banks. A clear-cut case of evolution in action. Had Dr. Avery envisioned
the possibility?What if other meta-life forms were evolving as well?Now
her stomach and crotch itched. Painfully. Her skin felt like it was
burning from spilled acid.She buried her head in her hands. Her temples
throbbed and she feared every artery in her brain was about to burst. It
was easy, all too easy, for her to imagine a hemorrhage, the blood
seeping everywhere, destroying her involuntary processes, drowning her
thoughts.Had she really wanted to be alone? Where was Derec?Oh, that's
right...She realized there was a difference, normally a barely
perceptible one but in her heightened case very distinct, between
believing you were alone and actually being alone.Dawn was coming to
Robot City. The glow Lucius had created was diminishing rapidly as the
sun came up, and the waters of the reservoir rippled with irregular
flickers reflecting the rays.Rays that brought life. Ariel watched in
fascination as the pebbles at her feet shifted and made way for a gray
stalk that, within a matter of moments, twisted from the earth and
unfolded two tiny leaves. She accidentally grazed the edge of a leaf,
felt a sudden flash of pain on her finger. The wound was narrow, like a
paper cut. A bubble of blood seeped from her skin.Damn, that smarts, she
thought, watching as other stalks unfurled, twisting from the gravel.
Her head continued to ache. She stood and staggered to a boulder and
leaned against it, being careful not to crush any of the stalks beneath
her feet. But it was hard to keep thinking of it, even when she was no
longer moving. Hard to keep her mind on things, to remember.Her skin
itched allover now, in waves that cascaded up and down as if she were
being inundated by invisible radiation. She perspired. She shivered. She
moaned.She leaned back, looked at the sky, at the billowing clouds. She
opened her mouth wide and breathed deeply, trying to keep her mind
clear.For the pervasive itch had begun to resemble something'97a
half-tickle, half-pinprick that brought back the memory of a walk on
Aurora when she had sat down to rest and had felt something similar,
only subtler, tinier. She had looked down to see an ant crawling up her
bare leg. She had shrieked from the surprise of it, but had brushed it
off before her concerned robots could reach her.The effect had been
unsettling, to be so rudely touched by a mindless life-form that could
be carrying who-knows-what form of infectious disease. She had instantly
intellectualized the experience, of course; she had long ago decided the
Auroran fear of disease had been taken to ridiculous extremes. Even so,
an involuntary sense of revulsion and disgust at the experience, much
greater than was warranted, overtook her. It had lingered until she had
bathed in a whirlpool of disinfectants.That night she had dreamed of
being swarmed by thousands of ants. The nightmare had been similar to
what she was experiencing now.But the current feeling was much more
vivid.She tried to convince herself that it wasn't real, that neither
she nor Derec had detected any form of metallic insect life on this
planet. However, the robots had shown definite signs of intellectual
evolution. Perhaps that meant the cells forming the city were capable of
random mutation, which meant it was not unreasonable to assume that a
form of insect life was capable of developing.Ariel was frozen to the
spot with fear. She lowered her gaze, fully expecting to see a horde of
ants swarming about her legs, moving up her boots and disappearing into
her trouser legs, searching for just the right place to stop and begin
gorging themselves, before they started carrying away tiny pieces of
her.But when she closed her eyes, it was all too easy for her to imagine
the ants with their big compound eyes, glistening like tin in the
sunlight, with their piston-driven spindly legs and their
nuclear-battery-powered thoraxes, and especially with the steady,
mechanical motions of their mandibles searching over her epidermis like
the rods of a geiger counter. She could not as yet feel the mandibles
biting and tearing, but she was certain that the pain would come.
Beginning at any second.Where were the robots when you needed them?
Couldn't any see her? Weren't any around?No, of course not, she realized
with an ever-sinking sense of futility. You're at the reservoir, and
they're all in the city, pining about how there aren't any humans around
for them to take care of.There's soon going to be one less. Oh, Derec,
where are you? Why can't you help me?Ariel was afraid to breathe. She
thought that perhaps if she remained utterly stationary, like one who is
dead, then the ants might think she was nothing but a dead rock. But how
could she remain motionless for long without breathing? Wouldn't the
ants hear the sound of air moving in and out of her lungs?What did it
matter? She had to do something, even if it was nothing. She felt the
mechanical ants everywhere, crawling up her breasts, nestled in her
armpits, inspecting her hair. Why didn't they start eating? Weren't they
hungry? What kind of ants were they?They're robot ants, she thought.
Maybe they're trying to see if I'm human. If they decide I am, they may
not hurt me. If they decide otherwiseNow she knew why primitive man had
worshipped deities'97to stave off the tremendous fear of the last
moments of life, when there were profound good-byes to be said and
resolutions to be imparted, but no one to tell them to, and no time left
to tell them."Airr-eee-ll?" someone whispered timidly. " Arre 'u
asleep?"Ariel's eyes could not have opened wider or faster if she had
received an electrical shock. She jumped back in stunned surprise at the
sight of Wolruf squatting directly in front of her. And promptly smacked
her head against the boulder.Things got woozy as the caninoid cocked her
head. Wolruf held a clump of stalks in her left hand, and a few strands
hung from the fur surrounding her lips. "Arre 'u well?""Of course I'm
well! What does it look like?""My annces'orrs would have said that 'u
had vize-atorr.""Who? What kind?" Ariel snapped. She closed her mouth
with a force of will, then tried to compose herself. She was only
partially successful. "It should be obvious that until you showed up I
was the only one here.""Two rre-ponnzes: furrst, been watching 'u all
nite'97"'93What!?""Man'elbrrot rreques'ed it. Thought 'u woul'n't
apprresee-ate rrobut.""Why that big hunk of'97""Pulice, let me finish.
Seckon': ancess'ors would have said 'u weren't only theeng in 'ur mind
at moment, and I wai'ed, wa'cheeng, thinking it would be best not to
dis'urb 'u or 'ur vize-atorr.""And exactly what made you decide to
interrupt my strange interlude?""'U looked like 'u were about to
faint.""I see."Wolruf tipped back further on her haunches, so that her
back was perfectly straight. Her posture struck Ariel as being almost
humanly annoyed, especially when the caninoid crossed her arms and shook
her head, as if in disappointment. She went to great lengths to avoid
looking directly into Ariel's eyes, first examining the buildings, the
bank, the rocks, and then pointedly turning her back to Ariel, perhaps
to have a better view of the reservoir."Well, aren't you going to ask me
what my problem was?" said Ariel.Wolruf turned her head slightly. "Why
sshhould I?""I'97I thought you must might want to know, that's all.""Nne
of my bizzness. Not people's way. Deafenly not mine.""Aren't you
worried?""No.""Don't you care?""Didn't hav' to wa'ch 'u all nite. Was
migh'ily bored. Many times distrrack'ed. Could hav' lef' 'u at any time
and Man'elbrrot neither knowed norr carred."Ariel suddenly felt as tired
as she had ever been in her life. Even to shrug with a labored air of
nonchalance cost her a tremendous effort. "How flattering," she said
sarcastically.She immediately regretted the words. Wolruf was stopping
just short of saying she had stayed to watch because she was concerned
for her welfare. There you go, Miss Burgess, Ariel thought. You really
will go insane if you can't recognize the good in people, whether
they're human or not.She sat down beside Wolruf and said, "I'm sorry.
Please try to understand that in addition to all our other problems, my
mental condition gets out of hand sometimes.""Datzz all rite.'94'93It
isn't, it's just that I don't know what I can do about it right now. To
make matters worse, it always gives me an excuse to misbehave, even if I
don't know at the time that that's all it is. "Wolruf pulled her lips
back against her teeth in a kind of smile. "So'97are 'u well?""I'm
better.'94'93There's no rreazon to be upset about vize't from tricks'
er. Izz how he makes us obey his will, by makin' us see wha' he
wantzz.""That may be easy for your race to accept, but we humans aren't
so used to having strange beings make pit stops in our minds at their
every convenience."Wolruf nodded thoughtfully. " 'U simplee lack
perrspec'ive."Ariel nodded in return. She had half expected that as a
result of her apology she would feel the haze of exhaustion lift, but
instead she imagined each individual cell in her body deteriorating
steadily. A little while longer and she'd be a quivering mass of
protoplasm."It's an old Spacer saying that everybody likes to feel in
control of their lives, but with Aurorans it's only more so," she said.
" And why not? It's not only an effect of our current culture, but an
extension of our own history. As the first Spacers, we terraformed
Aurora to suit our own tastes and purposes. We did everything we could
to make our new planet a garden. We even brought with us the prettiest,
best, and most useful Terran species, leaving behind the ones that would
make life too unpleasant.""If tha' 'ur plane'zz history, then the
in'ivi'ual retlec'zz it.""Yes, until I was exiled and cut off from my
funds, I had a great deal of independence. Within socially acceptable
limits'97which I never really accepted anyway'97I had complete freedom
of action.""'U brroke those limitz'97""And lost control of my life.
Funny how the details of my rebellion are so fuzzy now. Must be a side
effect of my disease. Anyway, it's funny how the one thing I always
thought I still had perfect control over'97my mind'97seems to be
slipping away from me now.""Trry to relax. Take it from one who hazz
seen many un'err thrroes of vize'torr. 'U not control it, 'u detlec'
it."Ariel couldn't help but laugh. "You mean that when insanity is
inevitable, relax and enjoy it?""Not insanity. Merely givin' in to morre
compellin' fuch 'ions. Derec does that. That izz why he hazz so many
ideas.""I wish I could believe the same thing was true with me." Ariel
paused as the implications of Wolruf's remark began to sink in. "Is that
what he's doing when he spends so much time with Lucius, when he should
be figuring out a way to get us off this hellhole?"Suddenly Ariel
stiffened. Her eyes went wide."Wha' izz it?" Wolruf asked. "Wha'zz
wrron'?'94"I don't know," she replied."Ano'herr vize-shon?""I'97I hope
so." She grimaced, closed her eyes, and turned her head to the sky. It's
not real, she told herself, it's only something r m imagining. But if
reality is something we make, how do we deal with the forces making
us?But although she knew on one level that her neurological responses
were going awry, her physical self nonetheless continued to respond
realistically to the sensation of a distinct something, large and
six-legged, distinctly within her lifesuit. A familiar something. There
was only one this time, but it was bigger than she remembered. Much
bigger.It was crawling up her stomach. She forced herself to open her
eyes, fully expecting to see her suit clinging normally to her torso.
Instead she saw'97with a vividness she could not help but decide was
absolutely real'97the outline of a giant metallic ant moving beneath her
suit. The cold touch of its six legs, each pressing delicately against
her skin, sent chills of terror through her fragile, eggshell mind.The
outline moved distinctly, delicately forward. She felt the cold brush of
a mandible against her left breast, and watched in abject fear as the
forefront of the outline moved to her right breast. And rested on
it.Ariel screamed at the top of her lungs and ran headlong in the
direction she happened to be facing. She was vaguely aware of Wolruf
yelling behind her, but she was too busy to pay attention. She did not
know where she was running, only that she had to make a beeline
there.She jumped into the reservoir.She was in it for several moments,
stunned senseless by the ice cold water, before she actually remembered
diving in. Frantically, she tore open the snaps and buttons and zippers
of her suit and put her hands inside, rummaging about, searching for the
insect so she could pull the sucker out and drown it.But she found
nothing. When it came to her ambition for revenge, this was a
disappointing development. How she had anticipated seeing it squirm as
it tried to get away from her in the water! But on another level, she
was tremendously relieved. Insanity she could deal with; physical pain
was definitely a cause for panic.Ariel imagined that perhaps the ant had
been real after all, and had just torn through the suit on the way oat.
But the water around her, while not exactly clear, was very still. There
was no evidence of movement beneath the surface. Even the sand and dirt
she' d raised upon entering had settled down by now.She calmed herself
with an effort, closed her eyes again, and waited.Soon she felt
reasonably assured that the insect wasn't real enough to attack her, but
she stayed in the water just to be on the safe side. The water sent
pinpricks of pain cascading through her very marrow'97but even that kind
of discomfort didn't provide her with enough incentive to get out.Wolruf
sat patiently on the bank. "Are 'u well again?" the alien asked."I think
so," she said. "I had another visit.""Assumed as much.""I think my
visitor is gone now. I think I prefer looking at my episodes in terms of
visitors, by the way. It's making it easier for me to accept them.
""Good. Don't 'u wan' come out of water now? 'U mite catch cold.""No. It
feels rebellious, to be doing something prying robot eyes might
disapprove of. ""Will wait.""Thanks. I'll just be a few more minutes.
However safe my mind may feel while I'm in here, I don't think my body
can take much more of this cold."Something brushed against her. She
glanced down to see that something had stirred the dirt up. Something
too big to be just an ant. Something that was real."What's that?" she
exclaimed."Wha'zz what?" Wolruf inquired.But Ariel could not bring
herself to answer. Her teeth were clattering too much. Screwing up her
courage'97which she felt was in short supply these days'97she gingerly
ducked her head beneath the surface, keeping her eyes open in the frigid
fluid with, an effort.A hunk of metal lay half buried in the bottom of
the reservoir. The gentle currents had removed. enough of the dirt
covering it to begin moving it back to the shore. Its stiff hand brushed
again against her leg.Its hand?Ariel accidentally inhaled a noseful of
water. She shot up to the surface, sputtering."Air-eel?" asked Wolruf.
"Wha' is it?""It's a robot'97there's a robot down here!""Wha'zz it doing
there?" asked the caninoid, running to the edge of the water."I don't
know. I think it's dead!""Robotzz can't die!""Maybe this one can. It
looks like Lucius!"CHAPTER 5UNLEARN OR ELSEJust before dawn, Derec went
to sleep wondering what it would feel like to know who he was.He knew he
would dream. He would remember his dream, as always. He often searched
the imagery of his dreams for a clue to his identity, figuring that his
subconscious was doubtlessly signaling him information about this most
personal of all his problems.Often he dreamed he was a robot.
Collectively, those dreams were always similar. He might begin in the
survival pod, or in the diagnostic hospital, or even in his sleeping
quarters in the house he had had Robot City provide for himself and his
friends. Often he would accidentally uncover the Key to Perihelion; he
would open a console panel, or open a cabinet, or even find it in his
life-suit, and he would always use it.The destination invariably filled
him with keen disappointment, or even despair, for it would always be
another place where he had been during the last few weeks, subtly
altered, more menacing perhaps, but always fresh in his memory. Never
did he dream of a place he had been before he lost his memory. There
would be an accident'97he would fall down a chasm opening up beneath his
feet, a worker robot would misfunction and slice him open, or something
else equally disastrous would happen.But he would feel no pain. There
would be no blood. He would look on his injured body, and see his
skeletal structure revealed by his wound.But not his skeletal bone. And
therein lay the serious rub.For he would have no bones to break, no
flesh to tear. His skin would be plastic and his skeleton would be
metal. There would be blinking lights where his muscles should be, and
wires instead of arteries.And he would feel no pain, no life-and-death
anxiety about the wound, only a calmly overwhelming urge to repair
himself as quickly as possible.At that point the dream always ended,
with Derec waking up in a cold sweat, staring at his hand and wondering
if it just wasn't programmed to tremble at irrational fears, fears that
he had always been programmed to experience, at random intervals.He
always settled back to sleep with an effort, and though not a reflective
man he would invariably wonder, just for a moment, if, after you got
past the obvious, there really was any difference between feeling like a
human and feeling like a robot.Sometimes the same dream, or a close
variation on it, would begin again.Tonight, however, as he tossed and
turned, the dream was somewhat different.Not surprisingly, it began in
the square.It was night, and Derec was alone. There was not an entity in
sight. And as he looked at the slightly taller, slightly more freakish
versions of the buildings around the square, he doubted there was an
entity in the city.But something was missing. He sensed that though the
square was deserted, it was even emptier than it should be.Something
else should be here. Circuit Breaker! Where was Circuit Breaker?Derec
looked down to see that the plasticrete was crawling up his feet,
fastening him to the spot. There was the distinct sensation of his feet
merging with the plasticrete, of the meta-cells beginning to function in
harmony with his biological cells. Derec held down his growing sense of
panic with an effort. He did not know which he feared more: the
conclusion, or awakening before he learned what it might be.In a matter
of moments the meta-cells completely smothered Derec. So thoroughly had
the metallic cells mingled with his own that he did not know where they
ended and where his began.Strangely, he felt himself to be wider,
taller, more physically substantial in every respect. He could not see
nor move, yet found he had no yen to do either. He had become Circuit
Breaker itself, gathering in the energy of the starlight, transforming
it, amplifying it, and casting it out. He was stronger, sturdier, and
more solid than he had ever been before.But he had also lost his mind.
Suddenly he had gone from a someone to a no one. He didn't even miss his
sense of identity. He couldn't understand why he had wanted his memory
back in the first place. What good could thinking and knowledge do him,
standing so strong and bulky against the atmospheric tides?Derec awoke
gradually; a profound feeling of mental displacement aggravated him
during those moments in which his mind hovered in the regions between
waking and sleeping. In fact, those moments stretched out for an
uncommonly long time. Both his immediate future and immediate past
seemed hopelessly out of reach.But the future already beckoned. He
realized that for the last several moments he had been listening to a
loud pounding on the door. He recalled an appointment with annoyance. It
was too bad. He half wished he could return to sleep. He could certainly
use it.Oh well, there's nothing I can do about it now.He rubbed his
eyes. "Hold on," he said. "I'll be right there!"But the knocking
continued unabated, growing progressively more insistent. Now Derec was
really annoyed. The persistent knocking, if it came from a human, would
be very impolite. But robots had no choice but to be polite, regardless
of the circumstances. What kind of robot would be so obviously
predisposed toward the overkill of unnecessarily persistent
knocking?Derec suddenly realized. Oh no! I'd forgotten it was
Harry!Derec dressed hurriedly, opened the door and, sure enough, Harry
was standing at the threshold. "I assume I have not been knocking too
long," the robot said. "I have a hundred questions to ask you.""And I've
got a few more than that to ask you," Derec replied, motioning him
inside, "but I'm afraid we've got a limited amount of time today.""So am
I to assume that you are interviewing Lucius later?" asked Harry. "Why
chat with that genius when you have me around?" Then: "Was that good?
Was it humorous?"Derec tried to hide his smile. He didn't want to
encourage the robot, which didn't need it anyway. "I think you'll both
prove equally important to my studies of what's been happening to robots
on this planet. Did you bring your friends along?""M334 and Benny? No.
They are working on a project of some sort together. I think they want
its nature to be a surprise.""And it probably will be," said Derec
sarcastically, "if the events of the last few days have been any
indication.""Forgive me in advance, but was that remark also an attempt
at humor?""Not really, no.'94"I see. You must understand it is often
difficult for a robot to understand what a human's tone of voice means,"
said Harry, again very politely.Derec decided to take the question
seriously. "It was a casual observation, a commentary laced with what I
presumed to be light-heartedness, an attitude which frequently gives
rise to humor.""It sounded sarcastic, insofar as I can comprehend these
things. ""Did it, now? Maybe M334 should be here after all. Our
conversation last night was your first real contact with the human race,
wasn't it?" asked Derec, punching up a cup of coffee from the
dispenser."Yes, and an auspicious one it was, too.'94'93Whose tone is
elusive now, Harry? How long have your pathways been consumed with the
objective to achieve humor?""Since the replicating disaster that almost
destroyed Robot City, from which you saved us,
thank-you-very-much."'93And since then you've been pursuing your goal
with the single-mindedness characteristic of robots?""How else?'94'93How
else, indeed. Hasn't it ever occurred to you that even humor has its
time and place, that the average human being simply can't bear to be
around someone who answers every query or makes every casual observation
with a smart remark? It gets predictable after a while, and can cause an
otherwise pleasant social situation to undergo rapid deterioration.
Which is another way of saying that it gets boring. Dull. Mundane.
Predictable.""It fails to elicit the proper response.""Robots can't
laugh," said Derec cryptically, sipping his coffee. As bitter as bile,
it was exactly what his nerves cried out for."I see you have deduced the
basic conundrum in which I've found myself since I embarked on my little
project.""Believe me, it's obvious. But seriously, Harry, how would you
react if you were walking down the street and a manhole suddenly opened
up beneath you and you fell in?""What is a manhole? Is that some kind of
sexual reference?""Ah, no, a manhole is an opening in the street,
usually covered, through which someone can enter into a sewer or a
boiler.""Can you be certain there is nothing covertly sexual in those
words? I have been diligently studying the craft of the double entendre,
but there is much I have yet to grasp because all I know about human
sexual matters is what material the central computer calls up for me.""I
must personally inspect that material as soon as possible. But to keep
to the main subject, how would you feel if you fell down a
manhole?"Harry almost shrugged. "I would feel like going
boom.'94'93Seriously.""My logic circuits would inform me that the end
was near and, knowing me, would close themselves down in an orderly
fashion before I suffered the indignity of random disruption.""I see.
And how would you feel if you were walking down the street and saw me
falling down a manhole?""Why, logically, that should be hysterical.
Unless of course you went splat before I could fulfill the demands of
the First Law.""Hmmm. You see, in such an eventuality, you would
identify with my loss of dignity and, were you human, would relieve your
anxiety by laughing. Before you rescued me, that is. The question is:
how can you relieve anxiety if you can't laugh?""Everyone can agree it's
funny. That is how my comrades inform me when they believe I am on the
beam.""But a comic performing jokes in front of an audience of robots
can't stop his act after each joke to ask everyone if he's on the right
track.""There are ways around that. It is customary in a formal
situation for robots to nod their heads if they think something is
funny. At least, that is what I am trying to convince them to do."Derec
finished his coffee in a gulp and immediately punched up a second cup.
"I see you've given this some thought.""One or two.""Is that an attempt
at irony?'94'93No, at a joke.""I think that for other robots to find
your sense of humor worthwhile, you're going to have to think of angles
that relieve their own robotic anxieties. I'm not exactly sure what
those would be. You could make fun of their foibles. Or you could write
and perform skits about a robot who's so literal-minded that he
sometimes can't understand what's really going on around him. Some of
Shakespeare's characters have that trait, and they're human, but it
makes sense that a robot character would exaggerate things to ludicrous
lengths.""You mean a character who understands the letters of the words
but not their shades of meaning.""But the audience will. As robots, they
will naturally have positronic anxieties concerning their own
literal-minded traits relieved by identifying with him. He doesn't
necessarily have to be sympathetic, even; he could have the kind of
personality robots would love to hate, if they were capable of either
emotion.""What kind of anxieties do humans have?""It's difficult for me
to say. I don't remember any humans. I've just read a few books. Many of
Shakespeare's jokes, his puns, his slapstick, have a ribald, bawdy humor
that strikes me as slightly off-color today, despite the gulf of the
centuries between us. So I guess it's safe to say there's always been a
certain amount of sexual anxiety in human beings, and one of the ways
they relieve it'97or learn how to deal with it'97is through humor.
"Harry nodded as if he understood what Derec was talking about. Now, if
I only felt the same, Derec thought. I'm strictly on shaky ground
here."In that case, you could explain an old Spacer joke to me that I
have been trying to work into my act.""Okay?'85.Your act!?""My act.
Until now I have only told jokes to my personal acquaintances'97comrades
who understand what I am attempting to do. But I have been preparing a
presentation for an assembly. An act.""How many jokes do you have?'94"A
couple. I have failed to generate original material, so I have been
investigating the vocal rhythms behind existing jokes.""To hone your
timing?'94'93Yes, insofar as I comprehend what that talent includes.
There are no voice tapes for me to investigate, though the reference
texts contain frequent entries on such material. ""Okay, Harry," said
Derec, chuckling at the concept of all this as he folded his arms across
his chest and leaned against the counter. "Fire away!""With post haste,
sir. One day three men in a lifepod are coming in for a landing at the
local spacedock. They had been marooned for several days and eagerly
anticipate their return to the comforts of civilization. One man is a
Settler, another an Auroran, and the third a Solarian."Derec hid his
grin with his palm. Harry's delivery was indeed awkward, and his few
gestures bore little connection to what he was saying, but a solid
effort was apparent. Also, the unlikely combination of the characters'
derivations already promised interesting interaction. Historically,
there was much social friction between the groups: Aurorans and
Solarians both disliked the Settlers because of their recent
"third-class" colonization of the planets; and there had never been much
love lost between the Aurorans and Solarians, especially since the
latter had mysteriously abandoned their world and vanished. Derec
already made a mental note to tell Ariel this one."So the three men are
just overhead the dock when suddenly a freighter's radar malfunctions
and the gigantic ship crosses directly in front of their flight path. A
crash is inevitable, and the three men prepare themselves for their last
moments."A logical thing to do," said Derec. Immediately, he feared that
his words might have disrupted Harry's rhythm, such as it was, and so
resolved to remain quiet for the duration of the joke.Harry, on the
other hand, continued doggedly as if nothing had happened. "All of a
sudden'97mere instants before the crash'97all three men are bathed in a
yellow light'97and they disappear into thin air!"They look around and
they fail to perceive their pod, the freighter, or the docks. They are
in some kind of infinite pool of blue light-face-to-face with a strange
man with a wreath of leafy twigs around his head. The strange man has a
white beard, wears burlap robes, and carries a wooden staff. The men
realize they are in the company of some kind of deity."'I am known
throughout the spheres of space and time as He Who Points The Fickle
Finger Of Fate,' the man says, 'and I have come to point the finger at
you.' And true to his word, he points at the Settler and says, 'You
shall live through the next few moments, but only if you promise never
again to drink any sort of alcoholic beverage. Ever. The moment you take
a drink, regardless of how many years from now it is, you will die an
instant death. Do you understand?'"'I do, sir,' says the Settler,
'though is it not asking much from a Settler to expect him to forego the
delights of alcohol for an entire lifetime?'"'Perhaps it is,' says He
Who, 'but my demand stands nonetheless. I repeat, the instant a liquid
containing alcohol touches your lips, you shall die as surely as if you
had died in the crash.'"'Then I agree,' says the Settler
reluctantly."And He Who points to the Auroran and says, 'You must give
up all greed.'"'I accept!' says the Auroran at once. 'It's a deal!'"And
He Who points to the Solarian and says, 'And last, you must give up all
sexual thoughts, except for those you might have strictly for purposes
of socially acceptable wedded bliss.'"'Excuse me, sir,' says the
Solarian, 'but that is impossible. Do you not know what we Solarians
have been through? Because our centuries of social and personal
repression have ended so recently, we have little choice but to think
about our new freedoms, and often.'"He Who frowns and shakes his head.
'That is no concern of mine. The three of you have my terms. Accept them
or die.,"'I accept it,' the Solarian says."There is another flash of
blinding light, and the three men find themselves standing on the ground
as, in the distance, their pod crashes spectacularly into the freighter.
They all experience profound relief. The Settler wipes his forehead and
says, 'I am ecstatic that this little episode has concluded. Look,
yonder is a bar. Join me as I down some spirits by way of celebrating
our good fortune.'"The Auroran and the Solarian agree. They both desire
libation, and in addition desire to see what will happen to the
Settler."Indeed, the very second that the Settler consumes his first
drink, he dies on the proverbial spot. 'Leaping galaxies, the strange
man was speaking the truth,' says the Auroran. 'We must vacate these
premises!'"The Solarian agrees enthusiastically. But on the way out' the
Auroran espies a rare and valuable jewel beneath a deserted table. The
Auroran cannot resist. And just as he bends over to pick up the
jewel'97the Solarian dies!"Harry ceased talking, and the longer Derec
waited for the robot's next words, the more apparent it became that the
joke was over. At first he didn't understand and he had to visualize the
scene and what must have happened. The Auroran bending over...the
Solarian breaking his word....Derec burst out laughing. "Ha, ha! That's
pretty good. Very unpredictable. ""I understand that, sir," Harry said.
"I realize that the narrative leads you to believe the Auroran is next,
but I fail to comprehend exactly what the Solarian could possibly have
been thinking of. The central computer has thus far been unable to find
material that would enlighten me. Would you care to explain?""No, no. I
really do believe there are some things a robot was not meant to
know.""Do I have your permission to ask Miss Ariel the same
question?""Not before I ask her something slightly similar." He took
Harry by the arm and began leading him toward the door. "Now I've got to
get you out of here. Lucius is due, and I'd like to talk to him alone,
if you don't mind.""Sir, how could I possibly do that?" Harry
asked."Just a figure of speech," said Derec, reaching for the doorknob.
But before he had a chance to touch it, the door opened from the other
side.Ariel, her hair dripping wet and her suit clinging to her body,
came running into the house. "There you are!" she exclaimed."Don't you
ever knock?" Derec asked angrily, then calmed down when he realized
something serious was the matter. Besides, of course she didn't have to
knock. She lived here, too. "Are you all right?""Yes, of course. Wolruf
and I found, ah....'94'93Well? Out with it!" exclaimed Derec."I was at
the reservoir this morning," she said haltingly. "Uh, I was in the
reservoir, and I felt something strange. It was Lucius. His positronic
brain had been partially destroyed.""What did you say?" asked Derec as
the room began to spin."Lucius has been deliberately sabotaged. To the
utmost degree. You might even say he's been murdered.""Ridiculous," said
Harry calmly. "Only an outsider would have committed such a deed, and
that's impossible. The city would have responded to an alien
presence.""Not necessarily," said Derec, thinking of Doctor Avery, who
kept an office here, and whose arrival surely would not activate the
city's automatic warning devices."It's no accident," said Ariel firmly.
"I think you'll agree. Wolruf is supervising the robots who are bringing
the, ah, body over here. Then you'll both see for yourselves.""One of
you must know more," said Harry. "A robot would not willingly harm
another robot. Only you two and the alien are suspects."Derec rubbed his
chin thoughtfully. "No, there is no law actually dictating that a robot
shall not do violence to another robot. In fact, a robot would have no
choice if he truly believed harm would come to a human as a result of
his omission of action." He glanced at Ariel. "Where's Mandelbrot?
Wolruf?""Supervising the robots carrying the body here," she
said."Harry, please leave immediately. We'll finish our talk
later.'94'93All right," said the robot, walking through the door.
"Though I feel obligated to warn you: You have not perceived my presence
for the last time!""Is that robot for real?" asked Ariel after it was
gone."I'm afraid so," Derec replied. "Are you certain that we're dealing
with a deliberate case of deactivation here'97not an accident of some
sort?""No'97but, Derec, Lucius's face was struck in several places. It
certainly looked deliberate to me, as if someone wanted to ensure it
couldn't be identified.""Which is impossible, because most of its parts
contain serial numbers, which can be traced.""Exactly. So whoever did it
must have realized that in mid-act and then thrown Lucius in the
reservoir in the hope that it wouldn't be found. Or, if it was found,
it'd be so rusty that most of the serial numbers would be obscured.""And
unless we've an unidentified intruder'97which seems unlikely'97a robot
was responsible.""Amazing, isn't it?"Derec nodded. " Absolutely. What
were you doing in the reservoir?"Ariel blushed, though Derec couldn't
tell if it was from anger or embarrassment. "I was taking a swim.""Fully
dressed? Say, you've been losing weight, haven't you?" he asked, looking
her over with wide eyes."You'll never know. Derec, how can you be flip
at a time like this? To lose Lucius'97""So early in his career, I know.
The galaxy has been robbed of a great artist, I fear. Tragic. Simply
tragic. I have to laugh, Ariel. It's the only way I can deal with it,
and right now I don't care if you understand or not! Now be quiet and
let me think!"Ariel blinked in surprise, and jerked her head back as if
he had taken a swipe at her. But she did as he wished.Derec stared at
the wall and tried to remember when he and Mandelbrot had parted company
with Lucius. There had been a few hours remaining until the dawn. Had
Lucius said anything about where it was going or what it was going to
do? Nothing in particular that Derec could recall, just that it was
going to close down for a few hours before beginning work on its next
project. No, there wouldn't be any clues; Lucius certainly couldn't have
predicted or even suspected that it would be murdered.Hmm, can you call
the shutdown of a robot "murder" ? Derec asked himself. Or is murder too
strong a word to use when talking about a machine, regardless of its
level of sophistication?A few moments later, however, Derec realized he
wasn't ruminating on the incident so much as he was repressing a
profound sense of outrage. During their few hours together, Lucius had
begun to mean something special to him. True, there was the possibility
that he was overreacting because of his already well established
affinity for robots, but throughout his short life that he could
remember, he had demonstrated a special appreciation for intelligent
life in all its manifestations.Lucius was a robot, Derec thought. But I
fear I shall never see its like again.Derec realized after the fact that
he had paraphrased a line from Shakespeare's Hamlet. This reminded him
of the promise he had made to Lucius, and he mulled over the
implications of this promise for long minutes after Mandelbrot and
Wolruf had escorted the robots carrying Lucius inside, after they had
lain Lucius on a table. Evidently Mandelbrot or Ariel must have ordered
the robots to depart, because Derec never recalled giving such an
order.For a while, as he looked at the battered and distorted face,
Derec hoped he would discover that it was a dreadful mistake, that it
really wasn't Lucius there after all, but some other robot. But the size
was right. The model was right. The color was right. The unique
identifying features that all city robots possessed to some degree were
right. But most of all, the feeling in Derec's gut was right.Lucius was
indeed dead. Murdered. The logic circuits of its positronic brain had
been removed with precision. But the personality integrals had been left
in the brain cavity, left to be permanently damaged in the reservoir. So
Lucius's unique abilities at logic might still exist, but the
interaction between brain and body would probably never again be
achieved. The personality was gone forever."Excuse me, everyone," Derec
said, actually aware that his friends were staring at him, waiting for
his reaction. "I'd like to be alone with Lucius for a few moments."And
then, after they had left, Derec cried. He cried in pity and remorse,
not for Lucius, but for himself. This was the first time he could
remember having cried. When he finished, he felt only marginally better,
but he had some idea of what he had to do, and who to look to for an
answer.Derec found the ebony at the place he had come to think of as
Circuit Breaker Square. Other robots of various models and intelligence
levels stood around the building, watching its colors reflect the
sunlight in muted shades. Occasionally, reflections thrown off by the
smooth planes glittered against the robots and the other buildings. The
overall effect of Circuit Breaker was more restrained in the sunlight.
Doubtlessly that, too, had been part of Lucius's plan, to permit the
building to become controllable and hence "safer" in the day, while the
night unleashed its true energies. He would have to find out upon what
principle the solar batteries worked.That was another question Lucius
would no longer be able to answer personally; however interesting it was
on the purely scientific level, it did not seem especially important in
light of recent events.The ebony stood at the edge of the perimeter. Its
head never turned to the building; it was watching the other robots
instead, as if it was searching for some meaning in their activity. Or
lack of it, as the case was. The ebony stood straight and tall, with
barely a nuance Derec could call remotely human. It was easy for him to
imagine a black cape hanging from the ebony's shoulders, easier still to
imagine it standing on a hilltop and glaring in defiance at a gathering
storm.Blow wind. and crack your cheeks, Derec thought, recalling a line
from King Lear.Trying his best to look casual, as if he were simply
taking a stroll, Derec walked to the ebony and said, "Excuse me, but
didn't I see you here last night?""It is possible, master," replied the
ebony, bowing its head and shoulders slightly as if to take note of the
human's presence for the first time."With all the other robots?""I was
in the square, but my circuits do not acknowledge the fact that I was
with the other robots.""I see by your insignia and model that you are a
supervisor robot.""That is true.""Exactly what are your duties?" Derec
asked casually.With an almost stately turn of its head, the ebony turned
toward Circuit Breaker and waited until the length of the silence
between them became quite long'97deliberately, for a kind of dramatic
effect, it seemed to Derec. An answer was intended, but so was a space
of waiting. Derec began to get a seriously queasy feeling in his
stomach.Finally, the ebony said, "My duties are floating. I am
programmed to ascertain what needs to be done and then to do it or
otherwise see to it.""All of this is up to your discretion?""I am a duly
designated rogue operative. The city requires a certain amount of random
checks if it is to run at peak efficiency. If a machine breaks down
gradually, the supervisor on the spot might not notice because it is
there during every tour of duty. It would get used to the situation,
would not even realize something was amiss, whereas I, with my
extra-keen memory banks and an eye capable of perceiving individual
levels of meta-cells, would notice it immediately.""Once you actually
look at the problem, that is.""Of course. I doubt even a human can fix a
machine before he knows if and where it has been broken. ""Don't
underestimate us.""I shall strive not to. Do not think, sir, that my
sole function is to act as mechanical troubleshooter. My tasks vary,
depending upon the situation. Often central calls on me to provide
visual and cognitive assistance if there is some problem with robotic
efficiency'97not that my comrades ever function at less than their peak,
but because sometimes they cannot be certain that they are directing
their energies to the best advantage of all.""So you're a problem
solver! You help devise solutions to the unforeseen shortcomings in
central's program!"Derec leaned against a building and saw Circuit
Breaker weave back and forth like a balloon hung up in a breeze. He felt
like someone had hit him on the back of the skull with a lug wrench. His
lungs felt like paper. His ankles felt like the bones had turned into
rubber putty. At first he was too stunned to loathe the ebony, but that
feeling grew and grew, as he leaned there and tried to get his thoughts
straight.This robot has got to make decisions, Derec thought. The very
nature of its job calls for analytical creativity! It could have viewed
Circuit Breaker as so revolutionary to the robotic psyche that it
constituted an obstacle to the laborers' duties. And then...then the
ebony would have been forced to do something about Lucius.There's
nothing in the Three Laws about a robot being forbidden to harm another
robot. In fact. First Law situations and Second Law orders may require
it.This is not proof, though.For a moment Derec wondered what he would
do once he had the proof. He would have to keep the ebony'97or whichever
robot the murderer was'97functional for a time until the mechanics as
well as the psychology had been checked for anomalies. The question of
what came next would have to be decided after all the facts were in. It
was possible that the ebony couldn't help itself.Just as it was also
possible that the Three Laws had been a significant factor, that once
the ebony had embarked on a course of logic, it had followed it
rigorously to an end predestined for tragedy."Tell me," Derec said,
making an effort to stand up straight, "do you ever take the initiative
when it comes to identifying problems?""If you mean can I pinpoint a
potential glitch before central is aware, then the answer is yes. Those
occasions, however, are quite rare and often quite obvious.""They're
obvious if you're not central.'94'93Sir?""And do you ever take the
initiative in solving problems?""I have, and central has had to
fine-tune them, too.'94'93But not all the time.""I see I must be exact
about this. Central has only fine-tuned three out of forty-seven of my
solutions. Have I satisfied you so far with my answers,
sir?""Forty-seven? That's a lot of problems, and those are only the ones
you found on your own.""Robot City is young, sir. There will doubtlessly
be many glitches in the system before the city is operating at one
hundred percent efficiency.""And you're certainly going to do your bit,
aren't you?'94'93I can do nothing else, sir."Derec nodded. "I see. By
the way, what's your name?'94'93Canute.""Tell me, Canute, how would you
rate-efficiency-wise'97a robot that deliberately took it upon itself to
disconnect a comrade ?""Sir, it would have to be seriously examined.
Though of course it is possible that the First or Second Law would
permit such an action. "."Are you aware that someone, presumably a
robot, brutally disconnected Lucius last night? Damaged him beyond all
hope of repair?""Of course I am aware. News travels fast over the
comlink.""So you heard about it from other robots first?""Sir, why not
ask me outright if I was the robot responsible? You know I am forbidden
to lie."Canute's words were like a bucket of cold water thrown into
Derec's face. Their forthrightness startled him. "I'97I'97how did you
know I was leading up to that?""It seemed obvious from your line of
questioning.'94'93I see you have advanced deductive abilities.'94'93It
is a prerequisite for my line of work."Hmmm. I think you just may be the
kind of robot I need, Derec thought. Putting aside his feelings for
Lucius with a force of will, he thought of Ariel, and of the possibility
that Canute, who made its intuitive leaps from a solidly practical
framework, would be just the one to help him diagnose and cure her
disease. Once its mental frames of reference could be adjusted, that
is.The trick would be to get it to readjust'97to admit the gravity of
its error'97without causing positronic burnout in the process. For in
that eventuality, Canute wouldn't be able to repair a paper clip.So the
direct approach was out. Besides, Derec had a promise to keep."Canute,
you may find this hard to believe, but I've been looking for a model
like you.""Sir?""Yes, I have a specific type of building in mind that
I'd like to see erected nearby. I'd also like it as permanent as
possible. I think its presence will do much to enrich life here in Robot
City.""Then I am eager to do whatever you ask. What type of building did
you have in mind?""An open-air theatre'97a playhouse. I'll give you the
details later, but I want to see functional elaboration in the design. I
want you to generate your notions of some of the details. In fact, I
insist on it. Understand?""Yes," said Canute, lowering its head
slightly. "May I ask why you want to have a theatre erected?""Have you
ever heard of Hamlet?"CHAPTER 6THE WORLD OF THE PLAYCanute was right
about one thing: news travels fast at comlink speed. Returning from
Circuit Breaker Square to his quarters, Derec hadn't even gotten through
the door before Mandelbrot began talking."Master, where have you been? I
have been besieged by requests to assist you in your latest project. I
fear that, lacking sufficient information, I was forced to tell everyone
to wait. I hope that was all right.""It was," said Derec, lying down on
the couch. "Where's Ariel?""She went to her room. She mumbled something
about mopping up on her Shakespeare.""I think you mean brushing
up.'94'93If you say so.""You're not very comfortable with human idioms,
are you, Mandelbrot?""I can be neither comfortable nor uncomfortable
conversing with them. But I take you to mean it is sometimes difficult
for me to translate their peculiar surface meanings in practical terms.
For instance, how do you brush up someone who is ancient history? In
that respect, I do sometimes have problems communicating. But about this
project....""All right, I'll tell you. But wait'97where's
Wolruf?'94'93With Miss Ariel. I think Wolruf is performing some task.
Forgive me if I am again misphrasing it, but she is being Miss Ariel's
line coach.""Ssh. Quiet. Listen."And Derec heard, very softly, through
the closed door, Ariel speaking the words, "Oh, what a noble mind is
here o'erthrown! The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue,
sword; the expectancy and rose of the fair state, the glass of fashion
and the mould of form, the observed of all observers, is, er,
ah'97""Kwei-it," said Wolruf in a low volume that wasn't hushed enough
to be called a whisper, but was probably as close to one as she could
manage."Quite, quite down!" Ariel finished enthusiastically."Hmm, it
seems my second bit of casting is almost complete," said Derec."Casting,
master?" said Mandelbrot. "You are having a cast made? Have you injured
yourself?""No, not at all," Derec replied, laughing."I must say, it
seemed you were hiding your suffering awfully well.""It's my hobby.
Listen, tell me what you would do with the robot that dismantled
Lucius." The sudden shock of the image of the robot lying there, behind
the closed door to his office, sent a tremor of loss and grief through
Derec's veins. And of terror, too. He'd never before thought robots were
things that could die. He'd always assumed they were immortal in a way
that life could never be."Forgive me, master, but I would think nothing
of it. I would merely follow your instructions.""And what if I wasn't
around to give you instructions? What if you had to decide when you were
on your own?""First, I would solicit the robot's explanation, and learn
of any justifications for its actions, if any, it may have had,
particularly as they involved its interpretation of the Three Laws.""But
there is no law against a robot harming another robot.""Of course, and
the robot in question may have been operating on instructions from a
human. But I gather such is not the case here.'94'93Well, yes...'94'93So
after having received the explanation, I would take the safest course
and have the robot closed down until the proper repairs could be
administered, or until instructions could be received from human
sources.""That could take a long time, particularly here on Robot
City.""No harm would be done. Upon reactivation, if that is what is
decided upon, the robot would behave as if it had just been shut down
for a tune-up the day before.""Hmm. But what if there was something you
needed from the robot?""Then that would depend on what you needed, and
how badly you needed it.""I'm glad you feel that way, not that you can
feel, I know, but it makes me feel better to know your logic circuits
concur with some of this..." And he explained to Mandelbrot his theory
that a creative robot with a scientific bent might be able to make a
diagnostic breakthrough to help Ariel."But how do you know that Canute
possesses scientific talents?""I don't. But I may be able to use its
mind to help me learn more about what's happening to the robots in this
place. And I need to do it'97to get Canute to admit to its error without
drifting out in the process. That's one reason why I'm putting on this
play.""This play?""Hamlet. by William Shakespeare. Quiet;
listen."Ariel's voice came through the door, muffled but quite clear as
she repeated and then continued the speech she had rehearsed earlier,
this time in louder, more confident cadences. "And I of ladies most
deject and wretched, that suck'd the honey of his music vows, now see
that noble and most sovereign reason, like sweet bells jangled, out of
tune and harsh.""Isn't that beautiful?" Derec gushed."The words, master,
or Miss Ariel saying them?'94'93Have you been talking to Harry?""Master,
I do not understand your implication.""Never mind. Anyway, I'm going to
use this playas a lightning rod, to draw every robot with creative
tendencies to the same place, working on a group project, and then see
what develops. I don't know what's going on here, but whatever it is,
I'm going to bust it wide open!"Someone knocked on the door. "Get that,
will you?" Derec asked as he turned toward Ariel's office. "Ariel? This
is your director speaking! Come out here, will your'Ariel came out in a
flash, followed by a bounding Wolruf. "Director?" she said. "Then who's
going to be my leading man ?""Oh? When you found out about this
production, how did you know you were going to be Ophelia?""Because
clearly I possess all the mental and physical qualifications. Who better
to playa girl who's going insane than one who really is? Of course, I
don't know who's going to play Hamlet's mother, but that's not my
problem, is it?"At least she's keeping her sense of humor about things,
Derec thought. "No'97it's your director's'97and your leading
man's."Ariel grinned and bowed. "At your service, Mr.
Director.""Master'97""Yes, Mandelbrot.""Forgive the intrusion, Master
Derec and Mistress Ariel, but Harry, Benny, and M334 are at the door.
They said they had vibes to present to you.""Vibess?" said Wolruf. "Not
ni-ice word on my would.""Yes, but who knows what it means here," said
Ariel. "Send them in, Mandelbrot.""Yes, I suppose we have to begin
interviewing for our cast and crew sooner than later," said Derec.In
walked the three robots, each carrying brass objects. Each object struck
Derec as being rather strange. M334 held a tube with two dozen keys,
with what appeared to be a mouthpiece on one end. It was evidently a
wind instrument, though what sort of sound it was supposed to make,
Derec had no way of imagining.Nor did he know what sort of sounds he
might expect from the other two instruments held by the other two
robots. Benny's was smaller than M334's, and could be easily held in one
hand; there were three taps on the top, presumably to modulate the sonic
textures. Harry's was the straightest and the longest of the three; it
had a sliding device that evidently would lengthen or shorten the tubing
to match the player's will, again presumably to modulate the sound."Good
day, sir," said Benny. "We can only presume we are interrupting your
preparations'97""Good grief, word travels fast around here!" Ariel
exclaimed."You found out, didn't you?" said Derec. Ariel shrugged. "I
heard it from Wolruf.""And how did you hear about it, Wolruf?" Derec
asked.Wolruf merely shrugged. The effort made her entire body
quiver."'97and so we thought you might want to see for yourself the
results of a project we have been devoting ourselves to instead of
closing down in our spare time," finished Benny, as if no one else had
spoken."Ah, and what is the nature of this project?" Derec asked
suspiciously."Originally it was purely musical," said Benny."But when we
heard you were planning to engage us in a recreation of human art forms,
we performed research and discovered that music was often a significant
part of such functions," said Harry."That struck us as being
particularly fortuitous," said M334. "We thought'97perhaps
presumptuously, but how could we tell if we refrained from
inquiring?'97that our music might make a significant contribution to the
enterprise.""Uh, what kind of music are we attempting here, with those
things?" Ariel asked. " Auroran nouveau fugues? Tantorian
ecto-variations?""Something close to period, Terran-style," said
Harry."You mean from Earth?" Ariel asked incredulously. Terran culture
was not held in high regard in most Spacer circles."Shakespeare was from
Earth," put in Derec mildly."Yes, but he was lucky enough to be
talented," said Ariel. "You can't say that about most Terran
artists.""Perhaps you judge our aspirations too harshly," said
Benny."Yes, you should judge after you hear us play," said M334."Yes,
you should have plenty of critical ammunition then," said Harry.Ariel
stared at Derec. "It was a joke," Derec said."Close to bein' good one!"
said Wolruf.The three robots then magnetically applied computerized,
flexible, artificial lips to their speaker grills. The lips were
connected by electrical cords that led into the positronic cavities, and
Derec saw at once, by the way the robots exercised the lips and blew air
through them, that they responded directly to thought control.Just like
real lips, thought Derec, biting his lower one as if to make sure.
"Excuse me, but before you boys strike up the brass, I'd like to know
what names those instruments are supposed to have.""This is a trumpet,"
said Benny. " A saxophone," said M334."And a trombone," said Harry."And
by way of further introduction," said Benny, "the number we would like
to assault for your aural perusal is an ancient composition dating not
four hundred years later than Shakespeare's time. This was already
during the age of recorded music, but no tapes are currently available
through central, so we can only surmise the manner in which these
instruments were played by examining the sheet music. ""What there is of
it," said Harry. "Most of this number is improvised.""Uh-oh!" said Ariel
to herself, putting her hand protectively on her forehead. "I must be
having a delirium!""And the number we would like to assault is what the
reference tapes denote as, in the parlance of the day, a snappy little
ditty. This song its composer, the human known as Duke Ellington, called
'Bouncing Buoyancy."'I've got a bad feeling about this, Derec thought.
He waved his hand. "Play on, McDuffs!"The robots did. At least, that's
what the humans and the alien thought they were trying to do. The
musical form was so radically unlike anything they'd experienced, the
playing so haphazard and odd, so full of accidental spurts and sputters
and stops, that exactly what the robots were attempting to do remained a
matter of some conjecture.Benny's trumpet played the lead with a blaring
succession of notes that occasionally struck the ear as being just
right. The noise the instrument made resembled the wail of a siren,
recorded backwards. So high was its frequency that Derec became afraid
his ears would begin bleeding. Benny's notes, on the other hand, did
seem to possess some kind of internal logic, as if he knew where he was
going but wasn't quite sure how to get there.Harry on the trombone and
M334 on the saxophone attempted to provide Benny with a solid
foundation; awkwardly, they tooted eight measures of unchanging harmony,
over and over again. They nearly succeeded, harmony-wise, and perhaps
their glitches wouldn't have been so noticeable if they'd occasionally
managed to start and end the eight measures at the same time.The
trombone itself tended to sound like an exquisitely crafted raspberry,
surreally brayed from the mouth of a contemptuous donkey. The
saxophone's sonic attack, meanwhile, resembled nothing so much as a
gaggle of geese gurgling underwater. The effect of the three instruments
combined was such that Derec wondered momentarily if the robot hadn't
come up with a violation of an interplanetary weapons treaty.Derec spent
the first minute finding the music absolutely atrocious, utterly without
redeeming social value. It was the worse kind of noise; that is, noise
pretending to be something else. But gradually he began to perceive,
vaguely, the equally vague ideal in the robots' minds. The music itself,
regardless of the manner of its playing, possessed a single-minded joy
that quickly became infectious. Derec discovered that his toe was
tapping in a rhythm akin to that of the music. Ariel was nodding
thoughtfully. Wolruf had her head cocked inquisitively, and Mandelbrot
was his usual inscrutable self.Derec's mind wandered a second, and he
wondered if he could rig up a specimen of those liplike fixtures on the
mouths to help robots portray human emotions during the production. The
fact that most had immobile faces, incapable of even rudimentary
expression, was going to cripple the illusion unless he devised some way
to use the very inflexibility to greater effect. He imagined a set of
lips twisted in laughter at the play's cavorting actors, and in fear of
the ghost of Hamlet's father, and in anguish at the sight of all the
dead bodies littering the stage. Well, it's a thought, he figured, and
then returned his attention to the music.The arrangement of "Bouncing
Buoyancy" concluded with all three instruments playing the main theme
simultaneously. Theoretically. The robots took the mouthpieces from
their lips with a flourish and held out the instruments toward their
audience.Derec and Ariel looked at one another. Her expression read
You're the director, you do the talking."How did our number bludgeon
you, master?" asked Benny."Uh, it was certainly unusual. I think I see
what you robots are trying to get at, and I think I may like it if you
actually get there. Don't you agree, Ariel?""Oh, yes, definitely." She
was really saying I seriously doubt it."Iss it Ham-lit?" Wolruf
asked."That, I don't know," said Derec. "I suppose this Ellington fellow
composed other works, though.""In a variety of styles and moods," said
Benny"All adaptable to our instruments," said Harry."I was afraid of
that," Derec said. "But don't worry. I'm sure you'll improve with
practice. I take it this has been your secret project, Benny?"Benny
bowed in a manner curiously appreciative for a robot. "I personally
crafted the instruments and taught my friends what knowledge I had
concerning the art of blowing horns.""Take off those lips, will you?
They're just too weird."As the robots complied, Mandelbrot said,
"Master, this performance. Where will it take place? I do not believe
the city has theatrical facilities.""Don't worry. I've got it taken care
of. I know just the robot who can design us a theatre perfectly suited
for the denizens of Robot City. Only he doesn't know about it yet. ""And
who is that, master?""Canute. Who else?" Derec smiled. "In fact, get me
Canute. Have him come here right away. I want him to hear some of this
'Bouncing Buoyancy' brew.""Each age has different terrors and tensions,"
said Derec a few days later on the stage of the New Globe, "but they all
open on the same abyss."He paused to see what effect his words had on
the robots sitting in the chairs before the proscenium. He had thought
his words exceedingly profound, but the robots merely stared back at him
as though he had recounted the symbols of a meaningless equation,
interesting only because a human had happened to say it.He cleared his
throat. Sitting in seats off to the side of the robots were Ariel and
Mandelbrot. Ariel had a notebook in hand, but Mandelbrot, whom Derec had
appointed property master, naturally had no need of one; his total
recall would keep track of the production's prop specifications without
notes.Wolruf sat licking her paw in a chair just behind the pair. She
had insisted on being the official prompter, or line coach, and as such
had already spent a lot of time prompting Derec and Ariel while they
were memorizing their lines'97a task that he feared, in his own case,
was far from completed.Derec cleared his throat again. His awkwardness
showed'97at least if the knowing smile Ariel directed toward him was any
indication. Wolruf just licked her chops; he got the feeling that on an
unspoken level, she was finding the shenanigans of humans and robots
incredibly amusing."Hmmm. You're all familiar with the studies some of
you have been making concerning the Laws of Humanics. That means you're
also familiar, at least in passing, with the many peculiarities and
contradictions of the human condition. Passion and madness, obsession
and nihilism'97these things don't exist among you robots, but it's
something we humans have to deal with, in varying degrees, every
day."Shortly, we shall boldly go where no robot has gone before. We
shall descend into the dense, dark, deep, decrepit abyss of the thirst
for revenge, and when we emerge, we'll have
something'97something'97something really terrific to remember in the
days ahead. It'll be swell. You'll see.""Get on with it!" Ariel
shouted."Forgive me, master, but it is my considered opinion that you
should get on to the more theatrical matters," piped in Mandelbrot. In
an effort to appear natural, he had crossed his legs and held his palms
on his knee. He succeeded only in appearing like a bunch of plywood
pounded together with rusty nails."It's all right, Mandelbrot," said
Derec, feeling his face flush. "I'm just getting warmed up." Returning
his attention to the robots, he could not fail to notice their posture
was every bit as stiff as his robot Friday's. For a brief instant, he
wondered What in the world am I doing here? steeled himself, and
promptly got on with it. "Theatre is an art that depends upon the work
of many collaborators'97" he began.Here was the New Globe Theatre,
designed by the robot Canute and built under its personal supervision.
By following the leads of clues in the central computer that Lucius had
left when it had used its programs, Canute was able to tell the city
what to build and how long it should stand. Meaning that Canute had done
pretty much what Lucius had done, but acting under orders from a human.
(While supervising this aspect of his project, Derec realized it was
possible that Lucius had, in turn, followed leads suggested by Derec's
establishment of automats in one building out of every ten. But of
course Derec would never know for certain.)Perhaps the task has been
easier, less taxing for Canute because, unlike Lucius, he had had a
pattern to follow: that of the old Globe Theatre in the London, Earth,
of Shakespeare's day. But he had added his own specifications, without
Derec's prompting. He had attempted to ascertain the special problems of
form and function and how they either augmented or conflicted with his
sense of how a theatre should fit in esthetically with the environment
of Robot City.Derec had pointedly refrained from telling Canute why the
ebony, of all the robots in the city, had been appointed to design the
second permanent building of Robot City. And he had watched Canute
carefully while giving instructions, to see if it was in danger of
positronic drift for doing (Derec suspected) exactly what it had harmed
another robot for doing.But Canute had given no such evidence. All that
was needed to satisfy it, apparently, was for the impetus to come from
human instructions.Like the old Globe, Canute's theatre was roughly
cylindrical in shape, but it was also misshapen and bent, like a bar of
metal that had been slightly melted on the ground, then twisted beneath
a giant foot. Like the old Globe'97or at least according to most of the
conjectures that had been made about it after it had been torn down to
make room for a row of tenements a few decades after Shakespeare's
death'97there were three trap doors in the stage, leading to different
areas backstage. One backstage passage led as well to the city's
underground conduits, in case there was a power problem.There were both
a gallery and an upper gallery above the stage, and several hidden
cameras in the wings. The rows of seats were staggered to provide each
patron with an unobstructed view of the proceedings. Continuing the
effort of providing the audience with the best possible lines of sight,
the floor was raised and leveled in a series of gradual steps.And, in
the tradition of modem concert venues, tremendous screens for close-up
shots were hung above the stage. Microphones were concealed throughout
the stage and galleries.Even the size of the threatre was impressive.
The angles of the design provided for a variety of possible dramatic
effects. But it was Canute's choice of colors that really made the New
Globe something to shout about over the hyperwave. On the jet-black
ceiling, sparkles wavered in and out of focus like stars seen through a
haze of heat. The carpet and seats were in gray-brown tones, variations
of the colors found in the conduits and on the surface of the
city'97Canute's version of "earth-tones." The curtain was a flaming
crimson that sparkled, too, and the walls were a soft, demure shade of
white. The soft currents of the air conditioning system continuously
rippled the curtains.Robots naturally had no need of air conditioning,
giving Derec the impression that Canute had designed the theatre not
only for robots, but for humans as well. As if the ebony had designed
the theatre in the secret, perhaps unrecognized hope that one day a play
for an audience of humans would be presented here.The subconscious
hope?"As robots, you are constitutionally incapable of telling a lie,"
Derec said to his unresponsive audience. "Only human beings can do that,
though not always successfully. Theatre, however, is a world of
pretense, provoking the collaborative activity of the spectator's
imagination. The spectator must be ready, willing, and able to believe
in the lie of fiction, in the hopes of finding amusement, and, perhaps,
some enlightenment. Our job is to assist him, to make him want to
believe the lie."On the Shakespearean stage, little was shown, but
everything was signified. Speech, action, prop, setting'97all worked
together toward the common end of providing the viewer a window through
which he could look on the world. And if all the efforts of the cast and
crew were successful, then the viewer, knowing that what he was seeing
was a fabrication, willingly suspended his disbelief, choosing to
believe for the moment that what he was seeing was real for the purpose
of relating to the story."Our challenge is different. We must aid,
force, and agitate robots to exercise their logic integrals in such a
way that the integrals, too, become suspended. We must not only provide
a window to the world, but to the heart of Man"As I understand it, there
are three worlds which must be considered for every production. That's
the world of the play, the world of the playwright, and the world of the
production. I think we can all agree on what the world of the production
is; r d like to say a few words about the other two worlds.""Are you
going to perform this play'97or talk it to death?" Ariel called out
mischievously.Derec laughed nervously. She had thrown him off his
rhythm, and he forgot what he had planned to say next."The world of the
playwright," Mandelbrot prompted helpfully."Okay. In our time, mankind
has achieved, more or less, an utterly civilized life. Few men ever
break the laws of Man. Most people live long, healthy lives, even on
overpopulated Earth, where conditions aren't too terrific."But in
Shakespeare's day, life was often less a gift to be savored than it was
a bagatelle to be endured. Working conditions were brutal and difficult,
education was nonexistent except for the privileged classes, and the
scientific way of thinking'97based on logical thinking with empirical
proof backing it up'97was only beginning its ascendancy. Most people
died before they were thirty-five, thanks to war, pestilence,
persecution, lousy hygiene, things of that nature. After all, Queen
Elizabeth I of England, the ruler of Shakespeare's day, was considered
odd because she took a bath once a month, whether she needed it or not.
But'97yes, what is it?" Derec asked, noting that a robot sitting near
Canute in the front had tentatively raised its hand."Most humble,
abject, piteous apologies tendered for this untimely interruption," said
the robot, "but after having read the text and pondered its meanings for
several hours, I find myself unhappily fixated on a problem of
overwhelming significance, and it's reasonable for me to trust that only
a human being can explain it adequately.""Of course. I welcome any
question. '93'93Even one of a subjective nature?'94'93Naturally.""Even.
one that may in some quarters be considered too impolite for normal
social intercourse?""Of course. Shakespeare was a missionary in opening
up the realms of Terran discussion for centuries.""Even if the question
is personal?"Without trying to be obvious about it, Derec glanced down
at his crotch to see if his zipper was up. "Why, uh, sure. We're going
to have some pretty complex motivations in basic human drives to examine
here.""Even if the question may be extremely personal?'94'93What?""Is
that a direct order?""No, it's a direct question, but you can take it as
an order if only it will get you to come out with it!""Excellent. For a
moment I was afraid my capacitors would not permit me utterance if I was
not buoyed by the added impetus of a direct order.""Would you please
tell me what's on your mind?""I know that the human male and female tend
to have different surface contours, and that this difference has
something to do with their frequently complex social interaction, and so
my question is simply this: just what is it that the human male and
female seem to be doing to each other in all their spare time?"A stony
silence echoed throughout the theatre. Derec's focus wavered, and the
gentle hum of the air conditioning went through a progression of
hypnotic wah-wahs, as if it had been filtered in a recording studio. He
shot Ariel a questioning glance. She smiled and shrugged. He looked at
Wolruf.She shook her head. "Don' look a' me. We have no matin' cuss'oms.
Jus' do it and done be.""I seriously doubt it," Derec snapped back. He
happened to glance stage left just as Harry, holding the trombone, stuck
its head from the wings. Benny and M334, also holding their instruments,
stood behind Harry and gestured as if to grab the robot by the shoulders
and pull it back.They evidently thought better of it though, and
permitted Harry to say, "Mister Director, I believe I can shake some
illumination on the situation."Derec bowed, and gestured him onto the
stage. "Be my guest."But as Harry quickly walked out and stood before
the audience of robots, Derec suddenly got a sinking sensation in his
stomach. "Uh, Harry, this isn't another one of your jokes, is it?""I
believe it shall prove instructive.'94'93All right. I know when I'm
beat." Derec moved away to stand between Ariel and Wolruf.Harry did not
even look at the humans before commencing. He concentrated his gaze on
the robots. "An axiom of carbon-based life-forms is that nature has
intended them to reproduce. Not necessarily on schedule, not necessarily
when it's convenient, not necessarily prettily, but well. If the
life-form in question derives a certain amount of gratification in the
act of reproducing, that is well and good as far as the life-form is
concerned, but all nature cares about is the reproductive urge. Some
visual data is available from central, and I suggest you study it at
your leisure, so we can all understand what chemical reactions are
driving Ophelia and Hamlet while the latter is putting aside the
pleasures of the moment to gain his crown." Harry nodded at Derec. "You
see, I have read the play already." Then, back to the audience:"And so
that you might understand the dark, innermost depths of the urge, I must
direct your attention to the early days of mankind's colonization of the
planets, in the days before he had truly accepted robots as his faithful
companions, in the days when the wars of Earth, with their nuclear
missiles and space-based defense systems, had followed man to the stars.
In those days, military bases on newly colonized planets were common,
and generally they were positioned at points remote from the civilian
installations"And, in those days, the sexes were often segregated, so it
was not unusual for a hundred or so men to find themselves alone in
remote, desolate lands, waiting for battles that never came, waiting for
the day when they could once again delight in female companionship and
discharge themselves of the urges building up during their isolation.
Building. Building. Building. Ever building."So what did the men do
about sex? They thought about it, they talked about it, and they dreamed
about it. Some of them even did something about it."The exact nature of
that something, as fate would have it, was uppermost in the mind of one
General Dazelle, for it was a problem that he, too, would encounter
while serving out his new assignment as commander of Base Hoyle. The
general was a meticulous person who liked everything shipshape, and so
upon his arrival to this remote military installation, he insisted the
attach'e9 take him on an immediate tour of the premises."The general was
quite pleased with the barracks, the battlements, and the base as a
whole, but he became quite distressed when he and the attach'e9 turned a
corner and saw hitched up to a post the sorriest, most pathetic,
swaybacked, fly-infested old mare in the history of mankind.
'What'97what is that'97?' the general asked."'That is a mare,' said the
attach'e9." 'And why is it here'? Why is it not stuffed and standing out
in the field, scaring away the hawks and crows?'"'Because the men need
it, sir,' said the attach'e9." 'Need it? What could they possibly need
it for?'" 'Well, as you know, sir, the nearest civilian settlement is
over a hundred kilometers away.'"'Yes.'"'And you know that, for security
reasons, the only means of travel permitted for enlisted men between
here and there is strictly bipedal.'"'Yes, but I fail to see what any of
that has to do with that failed genetic experiment.'"'Well, then, surely
you also know that men must be men. They have needs, you know. Needs
that must be tended to.'"The general looked in horror at the mare. He
could not believe what he was hearing. The information was in grave
danger of causing him severe psychological harm. 'You mean, the
men'97they'97with that old mare?'"The attach'e9 nodded gravely. 'Yes.
The urge builds up. There is nothing else they can do.'"The general was
on the verge of hyperventilating. He became so dizzy that he had to
steady himself by leaning on the attach'e9. 'On my honor as a soldier,'
said the general, 'I will never become that desperate.'"But as his tour
of duty wore on, the urge built and built, until one day he had no
choice but to admit he was exactly that desperate. Finally he could take
it no more, and he said to the attach'e9, 'Bring the mare to my quarters
at once.'"'To your quarters?' the attach'e9 asked, evidently a little
confused over something."'Yes, to my quarters,' said the general. 'You
remember what you said, about the men'97and the mare?'"'Yes, sir!' said
the attach'e9, saluting."The attach'e9 did as he was told. By now the
mare was, if anything, a mere shadow of her former decrepit self.
Recently she had fallen off a cliff, and had been lucky to survive with
only mildly crippling injuries, and her body had been ravaged by
disease. So the attach'e9 was quite horrified, stunned to the core of
his being, in fact, when the general took off his trousers and began to
have his "v ay with the pathetic beast."'Sir!?' exclaimed the attach'e9,
'what are you doing?'"'Is it not obvious what I am doing, sir?' said the
general. 'Just as the men do!'"'Sir, I fail to grasp your meaning,' said
the attach'e9. 'Never, never have I seen such a sight.'"'But, but, you
said the men'97their urges'97and the, mare..."'Sir, the men have their
urges, it is true, but I meant that when the urges become too much for
them, they climb on top of the mare and ride her to the nearest
settlement.,"There. Does that make everything clearer?" finished
Harry."Wha' is he talkin' abou'?" mumbled Wolruf."Now I'm totally
confused," whispered Derec. "At least his narrative technique is
improving."Ariel, meanwhile, couldn't stop laughing. "That'97is
the'97silliest'97thing I've ever heard," she said between breaths.Harry
remained in place on the stage as he awaited his audience's verdict. The
robots had greeted the end of the joke with a kind of stony silence that
only metal could summon. To a one, they stared straight ahead at Harry
for several moments.Then the robot that had asked the question that
prompted the joke turned to its comrade on the right and said, "Yes,
that makes sense.""I understand," said another."As translucent as a
gong," said a third."Mysterious, absolutely mysterious," said Canute.The
ebony was in the minority, however, as most of the robots seemed to be
satisfied with Harry's explanation.Derec waited for Ariel to stop
laughing and asked her, "Just what do you think is going on here?"She
turned toward him, took him by the arm, and whispered in a
conspiratorial tone, "The robots are beginning to learn about the world
of Man the way we do'97through jokes.""That does not compute," replied
Derec."Hmm. Let me put it this way. When you're growing up on Aurora in
the schools, one of the great mysteries in life is what's commonly known
as the birds and bees.""Yes, I know that phrase, but I don't recall how
I learned about it.""That's because you have amnesia. Now, listen, while
we received a lot of classroom instruction in the scientific sense, we
still had certain...anxieties. You don't remember yours, but you've
probably still got a lot. Not that I'm being personal or anything, it's
just a fact.""Thank you. Go on.'94"And one of the ways we kids relieved
ourselves of our anxieties, and found out a little bit about reality,
was through the artistic vehicle known throughout the galaxy as the
dirty joke.""And that's what's going on here?" Derec couldn't explain
why, but he felt his face turning red. "This is an outrage! Should I put
a stop to it?""Oh, you're such a prude. Of course not. This is all part
of the learning experience. You know the old saying, 'Nobody approves of
a dirty joke'97except from someone who knows how to tell it."'"Then why
am I going through all this effort to put on this big production? Why
don't I just ask you to strip for them?""You'd like it, but they
wouldn't care. They're not listening to these jokes for cheap thrills,
but because they want to learn more about us.""They really do. They
really want to understand what it means to be human, don't they?""I
think it's a lot different than that. Personally, though, I also think
you should keep your mind on what's happening now, because Harry's
launched into another joke."Sure enough, the robot had. "The last man on
Earth sat alone in a room," he was saying. "Suddenly, there was a knock
on the door'97""All right, you're a success, Harry." Waving his arms,
Derec rushed up to him and put his hand over his speaker grill. A
symbolic gesture, to be sure, but no less an effective one. "Just join
your comrades backstage until I call for you, okay?'94'93Yes, Mister
Director," replied Harry, briskly walking away."Where were we? Oh, it
doesn't matter. Let's talk about the play. 'The play's the thing,'
Hamlet says, 'wherein I'll catch the conscience of the king. ' Hamlet's
uncle Claudius has murdered Hamlet's father, the King of Denmark, then
taken his brother's place on the throne. To solidify his claim, Claudius
has married Hamlet's mother, Gertrude. When Hamlet returns home from
school, he has found the throne, which should be his, usurped, and while
he suspects his uncle of foul play, he has no proof but the word of a
ghost from beyond the grave."To secure this proof, Hamlet hires a
traveling troupe of actors to perform a play that mirrors the crime that
he believes Claudius has committed. He hopes that by watching his uncle
during the performance, he'll see the guilt, the uncovered knowledge of
the crime, written on his uncle's face."Claudius, meanwhile, suspects
Hamlet of faking madness in search of this proof, and so he is stalking
his nephew even as Hamlet is stalking him. The play is about the duel of
wits between the two, and the means men will take to have what they
want'97be it a throne, revenge, or justice."Derec turned to Mandelbrot
and nodded. Mandelbrot stood and said, "The Mister Director wishes to
thank you for volunteering and submitting to the interview process."
Mandelbrot gestured toward Canute's way. "And for following orders. No
doubt many orders will be curtly given you in the days to come, and
Mister Director wishes to thank you in advance. As most of you know,
Mister Director will assault the part of Hamlet, while Miss Ariel will
impersonate the doomed, lamented Ophelia. I will now communicate on
comlink wavelengths your assignments in the cast and crew categories."It
took Mandelbrot only a few seconds to do so, since he could impart more
information so much more quickly on the higher frequencies. Derec and
Ariel heard nothing; they only knew the robots were hearing because they
often nodded to indicate their understanding."Okay, is everything
understood?" Derec asked when Mandelbrot returned to his stiff sitting
position.Canute raised a finger. "Master, may I confer with you in
private for a moment?""Sure," said Derec, walking stage right to the
wings. "Come over here."Canute did, and asked, "Master, am I to impart
any significance to the fact that I have been assigned the role of
Claudius?""No. Should there be?'94'93It appears there should be. When
you first spoke to me in the square, you asked questions of a nature I
can only describe as suspicious. Soon afterward, you assigned me a task
similar to the one Lucius took upon itself. And now, you assign me the
role of a murderer'97the object of the play-within-the-play. Surely the
logical mind must be able to infer something from all this.""Naw. Not at
all, Canute. It's coincidence, sheer coincidence.""May I inquire
something further?'94'93By all means.""Why do you not just ask me
forthrightly if I am the one responsible for Lucius 's demise. You know
I cannot withhold truth. ""Canute, I'm surprised at you. I've got no
interest in asking you. Now get along. The best part's coming up next."
Derec pushed the ebony in the direction of the robots, then rubbed his
hands together as if to warm them with the help of a nearby fire. The
ebony had dared a great deal in asking Derec to confront it. If Derec
had taken up the dare, the game might have been over then and there, but
the right answers to all his questions might never be found.Mulling over
the incident in the moment before he introduced the best part, Derec
discovered that, despite himself, he was gaining a profound respect for
Canute. Not approval, just respect. If found out, the ebony was a robot
willing to face the consequences of its actions, but, in a way reminding
Derec of human emotions, preferred to face them sooner than later."Many
of you have probably heard of the human pastime of listening to music,
and of those who make or record music, but I trust none of you have ever
heard it before," said Derec to the cast and crew. "In fact, although I
can't ever recall having personally heard music before, I daresay I've
never heard it played in quite the way these three comrades play it."So
I'd like to introduce to you the three comrades who will provide us with
the incidental music of our production'97Harry, Benny, and M334'97The
Three Cracked Cheeks of Robot City"'Derec waved the three on as he
walked behind Ariel. He whispered in her ear, "This ought to be
good."Benny stepped toward the proscenium of the stage as Harry and M334
put on their artificial lips. "Greetings, comrades. We thought we would
perform an ancient Terran jingle called 'Tootin' Through the Roof.' Hope
it stirs your coconut milk."And The Three Cracked Cheeks began to play,
at first an A-A-B-A riff theme with a solo by Benny on the trumpet. A
solo from Harry on the trombone followed, and then M334 on the saxophone
took over. In fact, it wasn't long before the solos were alternating
thick and fast, with the two backers always offering support with the
riff theme. The solos began to give the impression that the three were
juggling a ball between them; and whoever had the ball had to depend on
the other two for his foundation.Derec hadn't heard the three play since
that first audition. The first thing he noticed about this performance
was their added confidence in themselves, the almost mathematical
precision of the solo trade-offs, and the utter smoothness with which
they assailed the tune. He looked down at his foot. It had been
tapping.He glanced at Ariel. He had expected her to be bored; her
contempt for all things Terran was, after all, the result of several
generations' worth of cultural history. But instead of appearing bored,
she looked directly at the three with rapt attention. Her foot was
tapping, too.'93Now, thiss iss Hamlet!" said Wolruf.CHAPTER 7THE MEMORY
OF DAWNIn two hours the performance would begin. Derec sat in his room,
trying not to think about it. He was trying, in fact, not to think about
much of anything. For though he had memorized practically the entire
play, and felt as if he could perform his blocking blindfolded, he was
afraid that if he ran through it in his mind now, at this late date, it
would fall out of his memory as surely as his identity had.After all, he
had no idea what the cause of his amnesia was. It might have been caused
by a severe blow to the head or a serious case of oxygen deprivation,
but he could have some kind of disease as well'97a disease that had
caused him to lose his memory several times, forcing him to start over
his search for his identity again and again. A disease that could strike
again at any moment. Such as three minutes before the production was to
begin.Derec shrugged and lay down on his bed. Well, in such an
eventuality, at least he would be spared the humiliation of
embarrassment, he decided. He wouldn't remember anything or anybody.The
most terrible part of his fantasy'97which he admitted was a little
paranoid, but perhaps wasn't totally unwarranted under the
circumstances'97was that in the past he could have lost, time and time
again, the companionship of intelligent beings who'd meant just as much
to him as Ariel and Wolruf and Mandelbrot did now.Maybe I should start
thinking about the play, he thought. It might be safer.The most
important thing for him to remember was the secret purpose of the
production, to watch Canute's reactions during the little surprises that
Derec had cooked up for the robot.For as Hamlet hoped to force Claudius
to reveal his guilt while watching the play-within-the-play, Derec hoped
Canute would at last be forced to confront its own true nature.This was
a nature Canute had steadfastly avoided confronting during rehearsals.
When praised for its work in designing the theatre, Canute had admitted
only that it was following orders, that it had given nothing of itself
that was not logical. When it performed a scene particularly well during
rehearsal, Canute had admitted only to following orders explicitly, to
performing mechanically, as only a robot could.But with luck, Canute had
by now a case of robotic overconfidence. Derec's plans hinged on the
hope that Canute believed it had already weathered the worse part of the
investigation.Of course, there was always the possibility that the
surprises wouldn't work. What if they didn't? Then what would Derec have
to do?Derec realized he was wound up pretty tight. He relaxed with an
effort. Then, when his thoughts began to turn automatically to the same
matters, he tensed up again and had to relax with a second effort. Was
this some form of stage fright? If it was, he supposed it could have
been worse. He could be performing before humans.There was a knock at
the door. "Come in," he said, crossing his feet and putting his hands
behind his head, so that whoever it was would think he was facing the
coming performance with a mood of utter calm."Jumping galaxies! You look
terrible!" said Ariel breathlessly as she closed the door behind her.
"You must be nervous. It's good to know I'm not the only one."Derec sat
straight up and planted his feet on the floor. Just by being there, she
had taken his breath away. She was in her costume'97a blonde wig and a
white gown that clung to her body as if it had been spun from a spider's
web. Her makeup heightened the color of her cheeks and lips, and made
her skin appear a healthier shade of pale. He hadn't realized that she
could look so beautiful, with such an inner aliveness.Of course, when he
thought of all the circumstances that they had faced together'97being
thrown into a hospital together, running away from something, being
stranded somewhere'97it stood to reason that she had never before had
the opportunity to accentuate her natural femininity. Her beauty in the
costume was familiar, yet it was also something new, as if he'd glimpsed
it in a long-forgotten dream.But if she noticed his reaction (that is,
if he revealed any of it), she gave no indication as she sat on the bed
beside him. However, she glared at him because of his second reaction.
It must have been none too flattering, for she looked like he had hit
her over the head with a rubber chicken. "What's the matter with you?"
she asked."What's that smell?" he replied."Oh, I had Mandelbrot
synthesize some perfume for me. I thought it might help keep me in
character.""It's very pleasant. ""That's not what your face said at
first.""That's because I wasn't sure what I was smelling.'94'93Hmm.
That's not much of a compliment. It's supposed to smell good whether or
not you know what it is. ""Please, I've forgotten my social training
along with the rest of my memory.""Your face said it smelled like
fertilizer.""I'm not even sure I know what fertilizer smells like."She
pursed her lips and looked away from him, but he couldn't help noticing
that her hand was very close to his on the bed. Their fingers were
almost touching. "Nervous?" she asked.He shrugged. "Naw. For all I know,
this could be my first encounter with perfume.""I meant the play,
silly.""Oh. Well, maybe a little. Hey, for all I know, I could be an old
hand at this.""I see. Do you think amnesia could sometimes be a blessing
in disguise?""Ariel, something's bothering you. Are you
well?'94'93Reasonably well. Doing this play has given me something
relatively constructive to concentrate on, though I'm still not sure it
was a good idea for me to play someone who goes mad. I'm beginning to
realize how uncomfortably it mirrors my own predicament.""Would you
rather play Hamlet's mother?""No. Well, maybe. But why couldn't I play
Hamlet himself? I can be heard all over the stage, and you said so
yourself, just yesterday, that I can definitely emote. Like crazy, if
you'll forgive my choice of words.""The role has been undertaken
occasionally by women, according to the theatre history texts. I'm sure
the robots would be only too positronically fulfilled to support you in
a production of Hamlet. Or of any other play.""I meant why couldn't I
play Hamlet in this production?'94"Aha. You had your chance, but you
volunteered to play Ophelia first! You were guilty of your own biased
thinking'97before I had the chance to engage in my biased thinking, that
is. ""That's true," she replied, in tones a bit more serious than he
thought his words warranted. "Besides, I think there're reasons why you
picked Hamlet, beyond the ones that have to do with Canute. You could
have picked any number of plays, you know, like Othello or Julius Salad.
""That's Julius Caesar!""Right. Anyway, I think you already saw a lot of
yourself in him'97the mad romantic, the soul-searching adventurer, the
vain, pompous, arrogant, stubborn...stubborn...""Egotist.""Right.
Egotist."Derec smiled. It was exciting to have her sitting next to him.
Except for rehearsing bits of business together, they hadn't been this
close for some time, and he was surprised to discover how much he liked
it. He was nervous and relaxed at the same time."Derec? Pay attention.
I'm talking to you," she said gently. "Listen, I've been thinking about
the differences between us and the people back then, or the way they
were presented, anyway. I can't help but wonder if anyone today ever has
the kind of love Ophelia has for Hamlet.""Or Lady Macbeth has for
Macbeth?""I'm serious. I know Ophelia is definitely a weak creature. 'Hi
there, Dad. Use me as a pawn in your nefarious schemes. Please?' But for
all that, she really does love with a consuming passion. I've never met
anyone on Aurora who's felt that kind of love...that I know of,
naturally. But I think I would be able to tell if there were any
Ophelias out there.""How about yourself?" he asked with an unexpected
catch in his voice."Me? No, I've never felt that kind of passion." She
narrowed her eyes as she looked at him. He couldn't help but wonder what
she was really thinking as she pulled away from him, put her foot on the
bed, and rested her head on her knee. "I've had sex, of course, and
crushes, but nothing like what aphelia must feel." She paused, buried
her face in her gown, then lifted her head just enough so he could see
her raise an eyebrow. With a decidedly interesting intent. "I might be
persuaded to try, though."Derec felt a lump the size of a sidewalk get
stuck in his throat. "Ariel!""Derec'97are you a virgin?""How am I
supposed to know? I have amnesia!" Now it was his turn to raise his
eyebrows, as she moved closer to him."You know, there's another aspect
to Ophelia," she said. "She represents something." Closer. "Something
Hamlet needs but which he has to deny to have his revenge.""He was a
user, too.""How about that." Closer.She leaned forward. He kissed her.
No, he couldn't remember having felt anything quite like this before.
Feeling obligated to pursue the matter scientifically, though, he felt
confident he might remember after a little more experimentation."Wait,"
she said after a time, pushing away. "I'm sorry. I got carried away
there. I'm not always in control of myself.""Uh, that's all right," he
replied, suddenly feeling slightly embarrassed."That's not the point.
It's my medical condition. Don't be offended, but right now I'm feeling
a little healthier than common sense tells me I should. Remember how I
acquired my little condition.""Don't worry, I won't forget," he said,
drawing her toward him to kiss her again. Their lips were millimeters
apart when there was an insistent knocking at the door. "Damn!" he
whispered in response. "It must be the Brain Police!""Master Derec?"
said a stone cold, metallic voice outside. "Mistress Ariel?" It was the
voice of a hunter robot."Yes? What is it?" Derec shouted. Then in a
whisper. "See? I was right, in a way.""Mandelbrot sent me to locate you
and remind you that you should depart for the New Globe soon. There are
a few details that only you can provide.""All right," Derec said. "We'll
be there soon.""Very good, sir," said the Hunter robot, its voice
already fading."What did you say?" she asked. "Brain Police.""I don't
know. It just popped into my head.""If I remember correctly, the Brain
Police are something from some children's holodrarna I saw when I was
growing up. It's famous. They're from'97from that series called Tyrants
of Blood."Derec was amazed. " About a masked man who rescues helpless
thought deviants on a totalitarian planet. I remember. Is that a clue to
my identity?""I doubt it. I said it was famous'97and it was syndicated,
seen allover the known systems. It's been playing for generations.""Oh.
So it means nothing.""No, it means at least we can be sure you're from
some civilized world.""Thanks a lot. Come on. Our public awaits."CHAPTER
8TO BE, OR WHAT?"Master, if my understanding of human nature is correct,
you'll be happy to know that we have a full house," said
Mandelbrot."Thanks, but I saw them lining up on my way in," said Derec
as he hastily donned the tight breeches that were a part of his costume.
He waited until he had put on the remainder of his costume'97a purple
tunic over a white shirt with ruffled sleeves, and a pair of
boots'97before he asked Mandelbrot, "How's Canute? Has it done anything
unusual'97anything that might indicate it knows about my special
plans?""So far it appears to be acting like the rest of the robots. That
is, as calm as ever.""You're not nervous at all, are you?""I am
naturally concerned that the illusion proceeds as planned, as are all
the robots, but the only nervousness I might possess, if I may use such
a word as 'nervousness,' revolves around my concern that you perform in
accordance with your own standards.""Thanks. How much time do we
have?""Mere moments until curtain.""Everything in place?""Everything but
your greasepaint, master.'94'93My makeup! I forgot all about
it."Mandelbrot helped him apply it, in great heaps that Derec was
certain would appear primitive and grotesquely overstated when picked up
by the cameras. "Is the stage ready?" Derec asked. "Everything in its
proper placer'"Naturally.""But the Hunter said'97""Forgive me, master,
but I deduced how you would want the remaining details handled."Derec
nodded, but said nothing. Suddenly he was gripped by the overriding fear
that he would step out on stage and forget every single one of his
lines. Or worse, he would begin acting out the wrong scene."Relax,
master. I am confident you will perform to the letter."Derec smiled. He
looked in the mirror. He hoped he looked fine. Then he walked out into
the wings, joining Ariel and the robots.Wolruf sat on a special chair in
the very rear section of the backstage area, before a bank of screens
showing the stage from several angles. Three supervisor robots sat in
chairs before the screens, operating automatic cameras concealed
throughout the theatre that, with appropriate zooms and pans would
provide a total picture of everything on stage. All that was left was
for Wolruf to call the shots and to tell one of the robots what should
be broadcast to the holoscreens throughout the city.Beside her was a
huge dish of artificial roughage. Though her concentration was on the
screens, she was absent-mindedly, systematically picking up handfuls and
stuffing them into her mouth.If she had a tail, Derec thought, she'd be
wagging it in happiness."Master, it's curtain time!" said
Mandelbrot.Derec raised an eyebrow. "Mandelbrot! Is that a quiver of
excitement I detect in your voice?"Mandelbrot shook his head'97Derec
couldn't tell if it was from confusion or from a desire to communicate
an emphatic no. "That would be impossible." He straightened and paused.
"Unless I've assimilated some of your lessons on voice inflection, and
have begun using them without conscious knowledge.""Later, Mandelbrot,
later. Let's get this show on the, uh, road." He gave a signal to a
stagehand, and the curtain rose.A single shaft of light revealed the
robot playing Francisco, the guard at his post, standing in the center
of the stage. The robot playing Bernardo entered and said, "Who's
there?"Francisco stood straight, gestured with his spear, and said in
authoritative tones, "Nay, answer me; stand, and unfold yourself."At the
moment, Derec could not recall a single one of his lines, not even those
of the difficult soliloquy, but now he felt confident that he would know
what to do and what to say when the time came. He steeled himself,
realizing that he would have to forget about being Derec What's-his-name
for a while. For the next three hours, he would be somebody else.
somebody called Hamlet, Prince of Denmark.Indeed, once he stepped into
the stream, Derec was rushed headlong down the events of the playas if
he had been swept up by rapids. He even forgot to spring some of his
surprises on Canute, slight line changes reflecting the events of the
past few weeks that, presumably, were subtle enough that only Canute
would grasp their import and realize Derec was planning to put him on
the spot. Derec eventually signaled Mandelbrot that he was calling off
that entire aspect of his plot, because to change the play at this
point, even for a good reason, seemed almost criminal.All the robots
performed brilliantly, with perfect precision. Derec realized that his
fears the show might be unsuccessful were ungrounded, at least on that
score. For he was dealing with robots, not humans who might vary their
performances from time to time. Once the robots had grasped Derec's
meanings during rehearsal, they had never deviated from them. And
tonight was no exception.Needless to say, Canute had given away nothing
during rehearsal. But tonight, during the performance, he played his
role beautifully, almost brilliantly. He played Claudius as Derec would
have liked to have instructed him to play the role, but had refrained
for fear of tipping too much of his hand. Tonight Canute was arrogant,
controlled, self-assured, guilt-ridden, and obsessed with holding onto
what he imagined was rightfully his.It was almost as if, having decided
that it would weather the production without being exposed, Canute had
mentally relaxed and had permitted itself to be swept down the same
rapids.Good, Derec thought during the second scene of the third act.
Then the big surprise should work even more effectively.For this was the
scene of the play-within-the play, and before the "actors" began their
"real" performance, the script called for a dumbshow, a play without
words, that mirrored the action of Hamlet. In the original, a king and
queen passionately embrace, and then the queen leaves as the king
sleeps. A third party enters, takes off the king's crown and then pours
poison into his ears. When the queen returns, she grieves for her dead
husband, then is wooed by the poisoner, who quickly wins her love.Derec
figured that a rewrite of a pantomime was all right, since it didn't
involve changing any dialogue. Besides, he'd read in the foreword to the
text that Shakespeare's plays had been frequently tampered with to make
them more relevant (or seemingly so) to the world of the production.But
in the rewrite, the king built a tall building of sticks and cogs, to
the tune of "Blue Goose." The queen admired it, then left. And as the
king gazed down upon his creation, the third party snuck up behind him
and bashed him over the head with a big stick. The king fell down dead,
and then the third party smashed the building. The Three Cracked Cheeks
played "Stormy Weather."Derec applauded to indicate the dumbshow was
over. When Ariel looked at him, asking with her eyes what was happening,
Derec merely shrugged, but watched Canute as he said his lines. After
the actors resumed their performance, Canute acted out the scenes of
Claudius's guilt no differently than before, after making allowances for
the robot's more "relaxed" attitude.The rest of the play continued
without special event. It proceeded until Hamlet died, Derec landing on
the floor with a resounding thud, feeling pretty dead inside himself.
Poor Lucius! The first creative robot in history was going to be
unavenged.Well. I'm not through yet, thought Derec, lying on the floor
as the robots wrapped up the last scene of the play. I can literally
take Canute apart if I want to'97and I think I will.Derec stood up as
the curtain fell and looked at everyone in anticipation. "Well'97how do
you think it went?""Forgive me, master," said Canute, drawing itself up
to its full height almost like a prideful human, "but if you will permit
a subjective opinion, I think the production was an utter
failure."CHAPTER 9THE COMPANY HAS COMPANY"What do you mean, this play
has been a failure?" demanded a livid Ariel. "The production was smooth,
very believable," she added, looking at Derec.At the moment Derec was
too busy being defensive to respond verbally, but he nodded gratefully.
Most of the cast and crew had gathered around them behind the curtain,
and nearly all were talking to one another. Things were too jumbled for
Derec to make much sense of it. He was feeling lost, anyway. The play
was over, and he had to go back to being his real self."Quiet, everyone,
listen!" said Canute in raised tones.They obeyed, and heard only silence
from the audience hidden by the curtain."You see?" said Canute after a
moment. "There is no response whatsoever. I have been vindicated: robots
are not artistic, nor can they respond to art. It is perhaps unfortunate
that your friend Lucius cannot be here to notice.""Forgive me, friend
Canute," said Harry, "but you have overlooked one fact: no one has ever
mentioned to robots how they should respond. If I know my fellows, they
are sitting there in their chairs, wondering what they should do
next."Benny said, "Excuse me, I must communicate through my comlink."A
few seconds later the house was filled with thunderous metallic
applause. It went on and on and on.M334 gestured to a stagehand to raise
the curtain so the cast could take a bow. And as the cast did so, Harry
said to Canute, "You see? They liked it!""They are merely being polite,"
said Canute without conviction."Congratulations, master," said
Mandelbrot. "It seems the play is a success."Derec couldn't resist a
smile, though whether it was because of the play or because an overjoyed
Ariel was hugging him, he couldn't say. "I just hope it came off as well
on the holoscreens.""It should have," said Ariel. "I told Wolruf to
concentrate on my best profile. The robots should be mesmerized by my
beauty forever!"They won't be the only ones, Derec thought as he and the
cast and crew took the first of several bows.Still the applause went on
and on; it seemed it would never stop.But suddenly it did, and the
robots all turned their heads around as a diminutive figure walked down
an aisle.A diminutive human figure, a stunned Derec realized.A figure
who was a roundish man with baggy trousers, an oversized coat, and a
white shirt with a ruffled collar. He had long wavy white hair and a
bushy mustache, and an intense expression that implied he was capable of
remarkable feats of concentration. When he reached the bottom of the
aisle, he stopped, stared angrily at the people and robots on stage, put
his arms to his hips, and said, "What is going on here? What kind of
game are you playing with my robots?""By the seven galaxies!" Derec
exclaimed. "You must be Dr. Avery!""Who else?" the man asked.CHAPTER
10ALL ABOUT AVERY"I want to see you'97you'97you'97and you," said Avery,
walking onstage and pointing in turn at Derec, Ariel, Wolruf, and
Mandelbrot. "Is there some place in this rather grandiose structure
where we can meet in private?"Almost immediately, Derec decided there
was something he didn't like about the man. No, he had to take that
back. Something about Avery made Derec feel uncomfortable and
uncharacteristically meek. Perhaps it was Avery's air of cool
superiority, or the manner in which he assumed his authority would be
taken for granted.Even so, Derec decided that cooperation was his best
option for the moment. Avery must have gotten here somehow; his Key to
Perihelion could take Ariel away, or perhaps his ship would be large
enough for more than one person, so at least Ariel would have the chance
to get the medical help Derec had so far been unable to provide. For
that reason, if for no other, Derec steeled himself and said, "We can go
to my dressing room, backstage."Avery nodded, as if deeply considering
the serious ramifications of the suggestion. "Excellent."In the room,
Avery calmly demanded to know who everyone was, and how they had gotten
there. Derec saw no reason to conceal the truth, at least the greater
portion of it. He told Avery how he had awoken bereft of memory in the
survival pod on the mining colony, how he had discovered Ariel, and how
they had made their way to Robot City. He described his encounter with
the alien who had instructed him to build Mandelbrot, and how Wolruf had
broken away from her servitude. He told Avery how he had deduced the
flaw in the programming that was causing the city to self-destruct by
expanding at an insupportable speed, how they had found a murdered body
that was an exact duplicate of Derec, and how he and Ariel had saved the
marooned Jeff from becoming a paranoid schizophrenic for the rest of his
life when his brain had been placed in a robot's body. Finally, he
recounted what little he had learned about Lucius; and how Lucius had
created Circuit Breaker the same night of the robot's untimely
demise."That's when I decided to put on a performance of Hamlet"' said
Derec, "in order to uncover the killer. But so far it seems my schemes
have had no effect on the robot Canute, so I still have no idea why it
did what I suspect it did. I've no proof, however, that even my theory
is correct. I guess when all is said and done, I just hadn't thought
things through enough. "Avery nodded, but said nothing. His expression
was rather stem, but otherwise noncommital. Derec really had no idea of
how Avery was reacting to the chronicling of all these events."So you
programmed this city all by yourself?" said Ariel casually. She was
sitting on a couch with her legs crossed, still in costume. The effect
was rather disconcerting, since although she had dropped her character
completely, Derec was still visually cued to think of her as Ophelia. "I
bet you never suspected for a moment that it would take on all these
unprecedented permutations.""What I suspected would happen is my
business," replied Avery as tonelessly as a robot."Iss tha' rud-ness
nexessaree?" said Wolruf. "Esspecially to one who did so much to
presserrve 'ur inven'shon.'94'93Preserve it?" said Avery incredulously.
Suddenly he began pacing back and forth around the room in an agitated
fashion. "It remains to be seen whether my designs have been preserved
or not. One thing is clear, though, and that's that something unusual is
going on, something I think you may have made even worse.""Forgive me if
I seem presumptuous," said Mandelbrot, who was standing next to the
doorway, "but logic informs me that it is your absence that has had the
most undesirable effect on the city. My master and his friends did not
wish to come here or to stay, and they have dealt with the developments
as best they knew how. Indeed, logic also informs me that perhaps your
absence was part of your basic plan."Avery glared at the robot. "Close
down," he said curtly."No, Mandelbrot, you shall do nothing of the sort.
That is a direct order." Derec looked at Avery. "He is mine, and his
first allegiance is to me."Avery smiled. "But all the other robots in
the city owe their first allegiance to me. I could have them enter and
dismantle him if I wished.""That is very true," said Ariel. "But what
would you say if I told you that one of your robots has a desire to be a
stand-up comedian?"Wolruf said, "Wheneverr hear joke, know firrss' hand
trrue meanin' of sufferrin '.""I have no qualms about attesting to
that," said Mandelbrot."You're irrational'97all of you!" Avery
whispered."I've been meaning to talk to you about that," said Ariel. "I
see," said Avery. "I know you'97the Auroran who had the liaison with a
Spacer.'94'93And I was contaminated as a result," said Ariel. "Does this
mean I've become famous? I'm not ashamed of what I did'97but then again,
I'm not especially proud of my disease, either. I'm slowly going mad,
and I've got to get off this world to obtain the proper medical
attention.""I could use some myself," said Derec. "I'd like to know who
I am.""Naturally," said Avery. But he said nothing else, and the others
waited for several seconds, each thinking that he would add the words
they hoped to hear. "But I have other plans," he finally said
off-handedly."What other plans?" Derec exclaimed, making a frantic
gesture. "What could possibly be more important than getting Ariel to a
doctor?"But Avery said nothing. He merely sat down in a chair and
crossed his legs. He robbed his face and then ran his hand through his
hair. His brows knitted as if he was concentrating deeply, but exactly
about what remained a mystery."Excuse me, Dr. Avery, but being examined
by a diagnostic robot was no help," said Ariel. "I need human attention
as quickly as possible.""Perhaps a diagnostic robot native to the city
will better know what to look for," said Avery, "which after all is half
the battle when it comes to medicine.""Unfortunately, Dr. Avery, that
seems not to be the case," said Mandelbrot. "Mistress Ariel was examined
by Surgeon Experimental 1 and Human Medical Research 1 during the
recuperation of Jeff Leong from his experimental surgery. They were able
to determine only that her illness was beyond their abilities of
diagnosis and treatment. They have not been affected by the strangely
intuitive thinking that is rapidly becoming endemic in this place,
possibly because they were first activated after the near-disaster from
which Master Derec saved Robot City.""You're sure of that?" Derec
asked."Not as to the cause, but that they have remained as they were,
yes. I have maintained regular contact with them," the robot responded.
"They are working on the blood and tissue samples that Mistress Ariel
left with them, but have made no breakthroughs. ""Then I was right."
Derec pounded a fist into his other hand. "The only way we can make any
progress on a cure is if we add one of the intuitive robots to the
medical team.""I don't think so," said Avery coldly. "In fact, all this
so-called intuitive thinking is going to come to a halt rather quickly,
as soon as I figure out how to stop it. It's too unpredictable. It must
be studied under controlled conditions. Strictly controlled conditions,
without robots running around telling jokes.""That's just too bad," said
Derec. "Ariel is going to be cured, one way or the other, and there's
nothing you can do to stop me."Avery's eyes widened. Staring silently at
Derec for several moments, he rapped his fingers on the makeup table and
crossed and uncrossed his feet. The actions weren't nervous, but they
were agitated. "Friend Derec, this city is mine. I created it. I own it.
There is no one who understands it better than me.""Then you should be
able to explain quite easily some of the things that have been going on
here," Derec snapped.Avery dismissed the notion with a wave. "Oh, I
will, when it's convenient.""Iss that why 'u crreated it?" Wolruf asked
pointedly, her lip curling"And I can dissect you if I wish," replied
Avery evenly. 'The fact that you're the first alien in human captivity
almost demands it as the proper scientific response.""Don't even think
about it"' said Derec. "First, Wolruf isn't in captivity; she's our
friend. We won't let you so much as X-ray her without her express
permission. Understand?""The robots accept me as their primary master,
and I bet they've already decided that she isn't human. After all, she
doesn't remotely look or act human.""But she is as intelligent as a
human, and a robot would certainly be influenced by that," countered
Derec. "Your robots just might find themselves unable to complete your
orders.""Only the more intelligent ones," said Avery. "There are many
grades of intelligence here, and I can restrict my orders to the lowest
forms in the eventuality of any conflicts in that area.""I think you're
underestimating his ability to take control", countered Ariel for
Derec.Avery smiled. "Your friend seems to have great confidence in you,"
he said to Derec. "I hope it is justified.""I wouldn't have gotten as
far as I have without some ability to turn an unfortunate development
around to my advantage," said Derec."He'ss had help," said Wolruf."I,
too, have assisted him, as much as robotically possible," said
Mandelbrot, "and shall continue to do so as long as I am functioning.
Thanks to Master Derec, I have learned much of what human beings mean by
the word 'friend'. "Avery nodded. He scrutinized Derec with what
appeared to be a peculiar combination of pride and anger. It was as if
Avery could not make up his own mind about how he felt about this crew
and what he wanted to do about them. Derec had the distinct feeling that
this man was flying without a navigation computer."How did you get
here?" asked Derec."That is my business and none of yours.""Did you
perchance find a Key to Perihelion? In that case, it wouldn't
inconvenience you in the least to permit Ariel and me to use it. I would
return as soon as she was being taken care of. ""I don't know that, and
in any case your suggestion is immaterial. I have no such Key.""Then
you've arrived in a spacecraft," said Derec, forcing the issue in an
effort to do exactly what he had been doing since he had awakened in the
survival pod: turn things around to his advantage. "Where is it?"Avery
laughed uproariously. "I'm not going to tell you!'94'93It is ironic, is
it not," said Mandelbrot, "that humans, who depend so much upon robots
to adhere to the Three Laws, cannot be programmed to obey them.""Thiss
one exis'ss ou'side lawss of 'ur kind," said Wolruf.Avery regarded the
alien in a new light. "If what you're saying means what I think it does,
then you're absolutely correct.""Is this how you get your kicks," asked
Derec, "by jeopardizing the lives of innocent people?"Now a light of an
entirely different sort blazed in Avery's eyes. "No, by disregarding the
lives of innocent people. The only thing that matters is my work. And my
work would never get done if I allowed my behavior to be restricted by
so-called humanitarian considerations. ""Is that why you left the city
for so long, to get your work done? To start other colonies?" Derec
asked."I was away, and that is all you need to know." Avery put his hand
in his pocket, pulled out a small device and pointed it at Mandelbrot.
The device resembled a pinwheel, but it made a strange hissing sound
when it moved, and the sparks, instead of corning out of the wheel, came
out of Mandelbrot!Ariel screamed."What are you doing to him?" Derec
asked, rushing to his robot's side.Wolruf squatted, and her hindquarters
twitched as if She was about to make a leap at Avery. Avery looked at
her and said, "Careful. I can make it easier on him'97or I can make it
worse!"Wolruf straightened up, but she warily kept her eye on Avery,
searching for an opportunity to strike.Derec was so angry that his
intentions were the same, though he was hoping he wasn't being that
obvious about it. But at the moment he was preoccupied with trying to
keep Mandelbrot standing, or at least leaning against the wall, though
he wasn't sure what difference it would make.Mandelbrot quivered as the
sparks spat out of his joints and every opening in his face. His
pseudo-muscular coordination was in an advanced state of disruption; his
arms and legs flailed spastically and an eerie moan rose from his
speaker grill like a ghostly wail. Derec pushed him flat against the
wall, and was struck several times by the robot's uncontrollable hands
and elbows. Despite Derec's efforts, however, Mandelbrot slid onto the
floor, and Derec sat on him, trying to keep the writhing robot down. But
Mandelbrot was too strong, and finally it was all Derec could do to get
out of harm 's way.Avery, meanwhile, calmly continued to point the
device at the robot. "Don't come any closer'97I can make it worse. I can
even induce positronic drift.""What are you doing to him?" Derec
repeated."This is an electronic disrupter, a device of my own
invention," Avery replied with some pride. "It emits an ion stream that
interferes with the circuits of any sufficiently advanced
machine.""You're hurting him!" said Ariel. "Don't you care?""Of course
not, my dear. This is a robot, and hence has only the rights I prefer to
bestow upon him.""Think not!" growled Wolruf."I can press a button
faster than any of you can move," said Avery, warningly."Why are you
doing this?" Derec asked."Because I do not wish this robot to interfere.
You see, I have stationed some Hunter robots outside this theatre. They
await my signal, even as we speak. When I alert them, they will capture
you and take you to my laboratory, where I shall drug you with an
advanced truth serum and learn everything your mind has to tell
me.""Will this serum help me remember who I am?'94'93Derec!" exclaimed
Ariel, shocked."I seriously doubt it. Unfortunately, the serum isn't
quite perfected yet'97it's another invention of mine'97and I confess
there is the possibility that it may actually jumble things up a little
more for you. For a time, anyway. You may take comfort in the fact that
the damage won't be permanent."Derec nodded. He looked at Mandelbrot on
the floor. "Sorry, old buddy," he said."What?" said Avery, a nanosecond
before Derec hefted a chair at him.As the scientist ducked, Derec ran to
the door, shouting, "Follow me! We'll come back for Mandelbrot
later!"The trio ran down the hall toward the stage, toward members of
the cast and crew. Wolruf was clearly holding herself back to remain
with Derec and Ariel."Out of the way!" Derec shouted as they moved past
the robots; he hoped that he could create enough confusion to slow down
the robots in case Avery invoked his precedential authority and ordered
them to capture him and his friends."Where are we going?" Ariel
asked."You'll see!"They soon heard Avery angrily shouting something in
the background, but by then they had reached the stage. Derec stopped at
the center trapdoor and opened it. "Quick! Down here!""But that leads
backstage!" protested Ariel."That's not all," said Derec. "Hurry!"Wolruf
leapt inside, and Derec and Ariel were quickly with her. As Derec closed
the door, they were enveloped in blackness. "We'll have to feel our way
around for a few minutes," said Derec as they made their way down the
narrow corridor. "Ah! Here! This door leads to the underground conduits
of the city! Even Avery's Hunters will have a hard time searching for us
down here!""Not for long!" said Ariel. "Can't they trace us with
infrared?""It'll still give us time!" said Derec between his teeth. "And
we can use that time to figure out our next move! Let's go!""All right,"
said Ariel resignedly, "but I hope somebody turns on the lights."As it
happened, the lights were the one thing they didn't have to worry about.
The lining of the underground conduits automatically glowed in the
presence of visitors, illuminating the narrow spaces several meters
behind and ahead of them. Things were not so elegant here. At first they
saw only what they had expected: wires and cables, pipes, circuit banks,
transistorized power generators, oscillators, stress and strain gauges,
capacitors, fusion pods, and various other devices that Derec, for all
his knowledge in electronics and positronics, could not even name. He
stared at the construction in fascination, momentarily forgetting the
reason why he and his friends had come here.Derec couldn't help but
admire Avery. Surely the man was a genius unparalleled in human history;
it was too bad he appeared to have lost his humanity in the process of
making his dreams real."How much further do we have to go?" Ariel
finally asked. "I'm getting tired, and it's not too easy to get around
in this silly dress.""I don't know," said Derec, breathing heavily. He
hadn't realized how tired he was. He had given all his energy to the
performance, and probably didn't have too much reserve left at the
moment. "We could keep going, I suppose, but I don't see what difference
it'd make.""More be'ween 'u an' 'ur purrsuerrs, the bedder," said
Wolruf. "Firss less-on pup learrns.""Derec'97what's that?" Ariel asked,
pointing to the illuminated regions ahead."What's what? Everything looks
the same."Wolruf sniffed the air. "Smell not the same."Derec moved up
the corridor. As he did so, the illumination moved upward with him. And
in the distance, just before the corridor was enveloped in total
darkness, wires and generators began to blend into an amorphous form.
Derec waved the others on. "Let's go'97I want to see what's going
on.""Derec, we're in trouble'97we can't go exploring just because we
feel like it.""I don't know why not. Besides, this corridor only goes in
two directions'97this way and that way."The further they went, the more
amorphous the materials in the conduit became, merging into one another
until only the vaguest outlines of generators, cables, fusion pods, and
all the other parts were visible. It was as if every aspect of the
conduit had been welded into inseparable parts. Derec had the feeling
that if he could open one of the generators, for example, what he would
find inside would be amorphous, fused circuits and wires."Deeper," he
said, "we've got to go deeper.""Derec, things are definitely getting
cramped here," protested Ariel."She's rite," said Wolruf. "Furr'her down
we go, the narrower the tunnel. If Hunterrs come'97""We won't be able to
do anything anyway," said Derec. "Look at what's happening here! Don't
you realize what's going on?""Looks like the city's beginning to
dissolve," said Ariel."Ah! In actuality, the effect is precisely the
opposite. The further up we go, the more the city begins to coalesce.
understand?""Are you serious? No!""The ultimate foundation of Robot City
is still further down this conduit. The meta-cells must be manufactured
below, and they're propelled upward in much the same way that water's
propelled through a pipe. Only more slowly.""Then why are all these
phony machines here?""They're not phony, they just haven't been fully
formed yet. The cells probably have to make it through a certain portion
of the foundation before they can really begin to get with their
program. You see, the atoms of metal form a lattice in three dimensions,
which is why metals occur in polycrystalline form'97that is, large
numbers of small crystals. The cells in this part of the underground
haven't crystallized yet. Ariel?"She had looked away. She was nodding as
if she understood his explanation, but her face was perspiring, and she
had grown noticeably paler, even in the dim light. Derec reached for her
as if to steady her, but she pulled away from him."Don't'97" she said,
waving him away. "I-I'm getting claustrophobic. It's too narrow in here.
I-I'm feeling all this weight on top of me. ""Don't worry about it,"
said Derec. "The foundation is secure. Nothing's going to happen.""What
are we going to do if the Hunters come?""They may not be able to find us
here. Even with infrared sensors. If the program ' s not complete in
this sector, then it' s possible that they won't be able to detect us.
""Only possibly," said Wolruf. "Even if they don' come, we'll hav' to
leave sooner orr la'err. Then they find us."Now Derec waved them both
away. "All right, all right. I know all this. I'm sorry.""U could no'
help ur-self."Derec snorted, which was about as close to a self-mocking
laugh as he could muster at the moment. It was bad enough that they had
come to a literal dead end'97they had arrived at the end of the road in
more ways than one.How he wished Mandelbrot was with them now! He felt
like a callous coward, having left him behind that way. He had left in
the hope that he would be able to come back for the robot, but now he
feared Avery would dismantle the brain and scatter the parts all over
the city, thus making it possible to rebuild him only if all the parts
could be found.Derec looked at his open palms. He had put Mandelbrot
together with these hands and his brain, from the spare parts he'd had
available. Now his hands and brain seemed hopelessly inadequate to cope
with the problems besetting him. He could not help Ariel. He could not
help Wolruf and Mandelbrot. He had been unable to make Canute confess
and to bring the robot to whatever kind of justice might be appropriate.
Hell, he may not even have solved the question of who killed Lucius in
the first place. Last'97but at the moment the very least'97he had been
unable to help himself.Wolruf made a gurgling sound deep in her throat.
"Derec, a prroblem.""Another one?'94'93Oh, yes!"Derec looked up to see,
at the edge of the darkness above them, the Hunter robots
advancing.CHAPTER 11DREAMS OUT OF JOINTDerec awoke in a place that he
knew was not real. Otherwise, he had no idea where he was. He stood on a
smooth copper plane extending unbroken in all directions. Above him was
a pitch-black sky. Theoretically, he should have been engulfed in
darkness as well, since the copper was hardly an obvious source of
illumination, but vision was no problem.In fact, Derec realized, his
range of sight extended into the ultraviolet and infrared range. When he
looked down to inspect his hand, his neck joints creaked: he would not
have been able to hear that sound if he had been human. For he was now a
robot. His metal hand proved that beyond doubt.Normally, such a turn of
events would have sent him into a fit of deep depression, but, now that
the deed was done, Derec accepted it quite readily. He did not know why
or how he had changed, nor did he think the reasons mattered much. All
that remained was for him to figure out what he wanted to do
next.Logically, he should walk. Since there was no logical way to
determine if one direction was preferable to any other, he simply
started off in the direction he happened to be facing.And as he walked,
he saw that something was growing in the distance. He walked more
quickly, hoping to reach his destination that much faster, but it always
remained the same distance away.So he ran, and the something seemed to
glide across the copper surface away from him, maintaining the distance
between them.He saw that at the upper regions of the something were the
spires of a city, streaking against the sky as the foundation glided
away. Streaking against the sky and cutting through it, tearing it,
exposing the whiteness beyond. Ribbons of whiteness dangled from the
nothingness, and though Derec could not reach the city, eventually he
did stand directly beneath the ribbons. Reason told him that they were
far away, probably at least a kilometer above him, but he gave in to the
urge to reach out and touch one.He grabbed it, and felt a flash of
searing heat blaze through his soul. He tried to scream, but could not
make a sound.He tried to release the ribbon, but it clung to his
fingers. It expanded. It enveloped him, smothering the copper and the
blackness of the world.Or was he falling inside the ribbon? It was hard
to tell. Reason also began to tell him that this was a dream of some
sort that he was living, and that it would be better if he went along
with it and tried not to fight it. Perhaps his mind was trying to tell
him something.He fell through the whiteness until he came to a school of
giant amoebae, but instead of being creatures of proteins they were
composed of circuits laid out like a lattice. He kicked his legs and
waved his arms, and discovered that he could swim the currents of
whiteness just as they could. He swam with them...'85Until they swept
'round and 'round in circles, disappearing into a point in the whiteness
as if it was the center of a whirlpool. Derec tried to swim against the
current, but he was inexorably pulled down into the point.He came out on
the other side, surrounded not by amoebae, but by molten ore rapidly
being solidified into meteors by the near-absolute-zero temperatures in
this space. Now he was in a void where there was no current to swim. He
thought that he should be afraid, yet he was facing the situation with
incredible calm. Perhaps that was because in this dream he was a robot
both in mind and in body His body was unaffected by the cold, and he
required no air to breathe, so, except for the danger of being struck by
a solidifying slag heap, he was in no danger. Hence he had nothing to
fear, nothing to worry about.Nothing, perhaps, except for where he might
be going. He wished he could resist the trajectory he was taking, but
there was nothing he could do about it, for there was nothing for him to
grab onto or to kick against. He had no choice but to submit to his
momentum, and hope to be able to act later.He had no way to judge how
much time had passed when he plummeted from the void into a dark-blue
sky, nor could he explain how he had managed to fall so far, so fast,
without bursting into flames upon his entry into the atmosphere.He
landed in a vast sea, and swam to a shore where the waves pounded
against the rocks. He crawled onto the beach, feeling as strong and as
fit as when he had first began this dream, but now a bit afraid that he
might rust. However, once he had walked away from the beach and could
once again see the city in the distance, his metal body was perfectly
dry, and none the worse for wear.He walked toward the city. Now it
remained stationary, and the closer he came to it, the more brilliant it
gleamed in the sunlight, with rainbow colors that glistened as if the
towers and pyramids and flying buttresses were sparkling with the fresh
dew of morning.And inside the boundaries of the city were buildings
shaped like hexagonal prisms, ditetragonal prisms, dodecahedrons, and
hexoctahedrons'97complex geometric shapes all, but each with its own
purity arising from its simplicity. Yet there seemed to be nothing
inside the buildings; there were no doors, no windows, no entrances of
any kind. The colors of the buildings glistened in the sunlight:
crimson, wheat, ochre, sapphire, gold, sable, and emerald, each and
every one so pleasing to his logic integrals, all so constant and
pure.Yet the deeper he walked into the city, the fewer buildings there
were. They were spaced further apart, until the emptiness formed a
tremendous square in the center. And in the square was an array of
mysterious machinery, surrounded by transparent plastic packages of dry
chemicals scattered on the ground. They all seemed to be asking to be
used.But for what?Derec did use them. He did not know why, nor did he
know exactly how he used them. He mixed the contents of the plastic
packages into the machinery when it seemed appropriate; in fact, he
rebuilt the machines when it was appropriate. Again, he did not know
exactly why or how he accomplished this. It was only a dream, after
all.And when he was done he stood at the edge of the square and looked
upon the opening he had made in the fabric of the universe. Inside he
saw clusters of galaxies swirling, moving apart in a stately, steady
flow. Gradually, they moved beyond his point of view, but instead of
leaving utter blackness in their wake, they left a blinding white
light.Derec happily stepped inside the light. It was time to awaken, for
now he knew how to reach Canute.CHAPTER 12THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING"Wake
up, my lad," came the voice of Dr. Avery from behind the veil of
blackness. "The time has come to join the land of the living."Derec
opened his eyes. Dr. Avery's face hovered over him, going in and out of
focus. Avery's expression was as neutral as his tone had been sardonic.
Derec sensed they were both calculated; the constant light burning in
the doctor's eyes was under control only with effort."What happened to
me?" Derec asked hoarsely. "What did you do to me?""The Hunter robots
knocked out you and your friends with a dose of nerve gas. The effects
were temporary, I assure you, and there will be no aftereffects. I had
to assure the Hunters of that, too, just as I had to convince them that
you three would be more safely moved through the narrow corridors if you
were unconscious. You see, I know these robots, and can justify much to
them that you would never dream of.""Where are my friends?"Avery
shrugged. "They're around." He must have thought better of that answer,
because then he said, and not unkindly, "They're here in the lab. You
can't see them yet because your vision hasn't cleared.""Where's
Mandelbrot? You haven't'97haven't dismantled him, have you?"Avery
solemnly shook his head. "No. That would have been a waste of some fine
workmanship. You're quite a roboticist, young man.""I suppose I should
be flattered.'94"I suppose you should be, too."Derec closed his eyes in
an effort to obtain a better idea of his bearings. He knew he was lying
down, but his position was definitely not horizontal. The problem was,
he couldn't tell as yet if his head was tipped up or down. Closing his
eyes, however, turned out only to make matters worse. He felt like he
had been strapped to a spinning wheel of fortune. He tried to move."I
want to stand up," he said. "Untie me.""Strictly speaking, you're not
tied down. You're being held down by magnetized bars at your wrists and
ankles." Avery held up a portable device with a keyboard. "This will
demagnetize the bars, releasing you, but only I know the code."Derec
felt ridiculously helpless. "Could you turn down the lights, at least?
They're hurting my eyes.""I know I really shouldn't care," said Avery,
looking away. "Canute!" he called out, and the glare diminished.It was
immediately easier for Derec to see. The light grid was several meters
above his head. He glanced to his right to see Ariel still asleep on a
slab, also held down by magnetized bars. Beyond her was a battery of
computers and laboratory equipment and various robotic spare parts'97not
to mention a compliant Canute dutifully overseeing a chemical experiment
of some kind.On Derec's left, Wolruf lay face-down on a slab. Also out
cold. Her tongue hung limply from her mouth.A closed-down Mandelbrot
stood nearby against the wall, looking like a statue, an eerie statue
that Derec half expected to come to life at any moment. Indeed, he
thought about ordering Mandelbrot to awaken, but he was too afraid Avery
had already planned for that contingency. In any case, he did not wish
to see his friend again suffer from the feedback Avery had brought on
with his electronic disrupter."Thanks for turning down the lights," said
Derec. " Are my friends well?""As well as they were. I really must
compliment you, young man. You're really quite resourceful.'94'93What do
you mean?""Even when you were unconscious, you were able to resist my
truth serums. You babbled incessantly, but I got little information of
any value out of you.""Maybe that's because I've none to give. I didn't
ask to be stranded here, you remember.""I shall strive to keep that in
mind," said Avery wearily. He sighed as if near exhaustion.Derec
certainly hoped that was the case. Now that would be something he could
turn to his advantage. "Did you find out anything about my identity
while I was out?" he asked."I was not concerned with your personal
matters. I merely wished to know how you had sabotaged the character of
my robots. "Derec could not resist laughing. "I've done nothing to your
robots or to your city, unless you could count saving it from a
programming flaw. Any mistakes in your design are your own,
Doctor.'94'93I don't make mistakes.'94'93No, you're simply not used to
making them. But you make them, all right. If nothing else, you
accomplished more than you intended. Your meta-cells are capable of
duplicating protein organizational functions on a scale unprecedented in
the study of artificial life-forms. The interaction between the constant
shifts of the city and the logic systems of the positronic brain seems
to liberate the robot brain from its preconceived conceptions of its
obligations. And if what's happening to Mandelbrot's mind is any
indication, the end results are infectious. '93'93I doubt it. Maybe your
robot is just stewed from incompatibility with the city's
meta-lubricant.'94'93You're grasping at neutrons!" said Derec, futilely
trying to kick off the bars over his feet and succeeding only in
twitching his toes. "Isn't it more reasonable to assume that the
environmental stress of the replication crisis'97caused by a bug in your
own programming'97triggered the emergence of abilities latent in all
robots of a sufficiently advanced design?"Avery thoughtfully rubbed his
chin. "Explain.'94'93There's no precedent for Robot City. There's never
been another society of robots without humans. Different things were
already happening before Ariel and I got here, things that had never
even been imagined before.""What kinds of things?" Avery was studiously
blas'e9."I'm sure you saw them from your office in the Compass Tower,"
Derec said. He was rewarded with a raised eyebrow from Dr. Avery. "Oh,
yes, we've been up there. I've also been to the central core, and I've
talked to the chief supervisors. Your robots decided to study humanity
in order to serve it better. Robots don't usually do that. They even
tried to formulate Laws of Humanics to try to understand us. I've never
heard of robots doing that before.""And I suppose you have a theory as
to why this is happening.""A couple." Derec started to count the points
off on his fingers, but it didn't work in his position. "First, the
stress of the replication crisis. It was a survival crisis comparable to
the ice ages of prehistoric Earth. The robots were forced to adapt or
perish. My interference helped end the crisis, but also helped shape the
adaptation."Second, the actual isolation of Robot City. Without any
humans around, evolutionary steps that would have been halted were
allowed to continue: the study of the Laws of Humanics, for one example;
robots getting accustomed to taking an initiative, for another. These
changes not only survived, they flourished. They've become part of the
ingrained positronic pathways of the robots here. Even the primitive
early microchips went into something like a dream state when they
weren't in use. Now we're seeing what happens when we don't wake them up
forcibly.""These things you're telling me don't prove a thing. They're
theories, nothing more. They certainly don't constitute empirical
proof." Avery stifled a yawn."Oh? I'm boring you, am I?""Excuse me. No,
you're not boring me at all. You're actually quite interesting for a
young man, though your charming ideas about robots and reality
positively reek of your inexperience. That's to be expected though, I
suppose." Again he patted the bar across Derec's feet.Derec scowled. One
thing was certain. He could deal with Avery's mental instability, he
could tolerate the man's arrogance, but the man's condescending
tenderness nauseated him to the core of his being. And not for any
reason that Derec could discern. That was just the way it was. He
couldn't help but wonder if he had ever had anything to do with Avery at
some time during his dim, unremembered past. "So what information did
you get out of me?"Avery laughed. "Why should I tell you?""Because I've
nothing to hide. Only you are insisting that I should be hiding things.
You don't ask my robot questions'97you incapacitate him. You don't ask
the other robots questions'97you ignore them. You ask me questions but
you only half believe my answers. You treat my friends like they
were'97they were mere inconveniences.""I'm afraid that's exactly what
they are," said Avery not unkindly."But'97but I thought you created this
place to learn about the kind of social structure robots would create on
their own.""Perhaps I did, and perhaps not. I see no reason why I should
trust you with my motivations.""But aren't you interested in our
observations?""No.""Not even those of Ariel Welsh, the daughter of your
financial backer?""No." Avery glanced in Ariel's direction. "Parents and
their children are rarely close on Aurora. ""You've heard of her, but
you don't want to help her? Aren't you concerned in the least for
her?""She is now an outsider in the eyes of Spacer society, and hence is
basically an inconsequential individual. I suppose in an earlier, more
idealistic time, I would have sacrificed some of my time and resources
to assist her, but time has recently become a precious commodity to me,
too precious to waste on a single human life out of billions and
billions. My experiments are at a sensitive stage, anyway. I can't
afford to trust any of you.""It's yourself that you don't trust," said
Derec.Avery smiled. " And just how did you, who know so much about
robots but so little about men, manage to figure that out?"Derec sighed.
"It's just a feeling, that's all.""I see." Avery turned toward Canute
and signaled the ebony with his finger.In a moment, both Avery and
Canute were leaning over the prone Derec. Already Derec could perceive
there was something different in Canute's demeanor...something missing.
The old polite arrogance and self-confidence were gone, replaced or
suppressed with a subservient manner that might have been willing, or
might have been only what Avery expected of him."Are you well, Master
Derec?" asked Canute in even tones."As well as can be expected. You're
strong, Canute. Why don't you pull off my bonds?""I fear that, while I
might be able to succeed should I make the attempt, it is otherwise
impossible," replied the robot."Why, 'Master Derec,' I expected better
of you," said Avery. "So long as you are not harmed, Canute has no
choice but to follow my orders. They take precedence over any you might
conceive.""I was just checking," said Derec. "But how do you know that
lying here isn't causing me grave harm?"Avery appeared shocked, but
Canute answered before he could. "I do not. I simply must take Dr.
Avery's word that no injury will come to you as a result of your
restraint.""How does it feel to be a robot, Canute?'94'93That question
is meaningless!" exclaimed Avery with a derisive snort. "He has nothing
to make a comparison to!"Canute turned toward Avery; a familiar red glow
was returning to his visual receptors. "Forgive me, Dr. Avery, but I
must beg to differ with you. I do have something to compare the
sensation of being a robot to, because after having spent the past few
weeks attempting to imitate the actions of a fictional human being, I
have some notion, however vague, of what it may be like to be that human
being. From that base I may extrapolate what it might feel like to be
the genuine article.""I see," said Avery, nodding in a manner that
indicated he believed none of this, and that he wouldn't be taking it
too seriously if he did. He glanced at Derec. "Who's grasping at
neutrons now, young man?""What else can I do while I'm stuck here?"Avery
smiled. Derec was beginning to dislike that smile intensely. "I can't
fight logic like that," said the doctor, stifling a yawn."Master Dr.
Avery, are you verging upon the state of exhaustion?" Canute asked."Why
yes, I am. I've been awake for some time now'97in fact, since I
left'97no, I won't say. There's no reason for any of you to know.""Might
I suggest you take refuge and sleep? It may be quite harmful for you to
remain awake long past your body's stamina quotient."Another yawn.
"That's a good idea." A third yawn. "You'd like me to leave, wouldn't
you?""Only because of your halitosis. ""Ha-ha. You seek to hide your
true designs behind a mask of frivolity. No matter. I shall take up
Canute's suggestion. I'll decide what to do with you four after I
awake." He took a step to leave, then turned to Canute. "Under no
circumstances are you to touch the bars restraining our friend Derec
unless I am physically present in this room, understand? That is a
direct order.""What if I have to go to the bathroom?" said Derec."You
won't. We've already taken care of your elimination needs."What did they
do? thought Derec. Dehydrate my bladder? This guy's a bigger genius than
I figured."Sir, there is the possibility that other forms of physical
harm may come to Master Derec and the others if they remain bound too
long.""They're young; they're strong. They should be able to handle
it."Canute bowed his head. "Yes, Master Dr. Avery."And Avery left.
Suddenly Derec felt his heart pounding excitedly, and he struggled to
calm down. The next conversational tack he took had to appear casual,
otherwise the crafty Canute, who after all would regard obeying the
orders from Dr. Avery as the most important guide to its words and
deeds, would see through Derec's plan.Derec hoped it was a clever plan.
He waited several minutes while Canute continued about its tasks, and
when he believed enough time had elapsed for Avery to have gone to his
sleeping quarters, he said, "Canute, I would like to speak with
you.""That would be quite acceptable, Master Derec, but I must warn you
in advance that I will be on the lookout for any clever ploys on your
part to talk me into releasing you.""Don't worry, Canute. I know when to
quit.""Forgive me, but while you may believe that statement to be true,
the reality lies elsewhere.""I'll take that as a compliment.""Neither
flattery nor insult was intended. ""Can I speak to you while I'm waiting
for Avery or my friends to wake up?""Certainly, if it pleases you.
However, I trust our impending conversation will have nothing to do with
your belief that I was responsible for the demise of Lucius."Derec
smiled. "Certainly, if you prefer. But what difference would it make to
you?""None, really'97only that for some reason I find the subject causes
my thoughts to drag, as if it somehow bogs down my circuits' positron
flow.""Interesting, but never fear. I thought I would find proof and did
not, so don't worry about it. Besides, it would seem I would have more
pressing matters on my mind than Lucius, anyway.""Yes, so it would
seem," said Canute."Yes. Well, it seemed that while Dr. Avery was
perusing my mind, I had a curious dream. It gave me a lot to think
about.""Master Derec, do you think I am the proper entity with whom to
discuss such matters? Human dreams are hardly my forte.""That's all
right'97I'm certain the field is not mine, either. But my dreams gave me
a lot of questions, and I'd like to see how an entity possessing your
own special strain of logic responds to them. ""Certainly. I fail to see
how any harm could result from an attempt, however feeble, to put your
mind at ease on these matters.""Yes. It may even do me some good.""I
shall endeavor to help you achieve that result.""Well, Canute, you know
that life began in the stew of Earth 's ocean as a series of chemical
reactions. The raw materials for life were present on other worlds as
well, but until recently there was no evidence that the stew had worked
on any other worlds.""Are you referring to Wolruf and the master who
once employed her as an unwilling servant?""Yes. Two examples from two
alien cultures, two other worlds where the stew came to fruition'97and
they're not even native to this galaxy. But the comparatively scarce
number of worlds where life has originated really isn't the point,
though I hope it amplifies it.""What is the point?""That although the
universe itself isn't a conscious entity, it possesses the raw materials
that, when properly set into motion, create consciousness. It has the
ability to create intelligent life, which is capable of understanding
the universe.""So while it cannot know itself directly'97""Exactly,
Canute. It can know itself indirectly. Now how do you think it does
that?""Through science.""That is one way, and we'll get back to that.
The universe can also examine itself through religion, philosophy, or
history. The universe can also understand itself'97interpret
itself'97through the arts. Viewed in this light, Shakespeare's plays are
the expression not only of a man, or of the race that has interpreted
them through the ages, but of the universe itself, the very stuff that
stars have been made of."Derec waited to see what kind of reaction his
words would foster, but Canute said nothing. "Canute?""Forgive me,
Master Derec, but I fear I must terminate my part in this conversation.
Something is happening to the flow of my thoughts. They are becoming
sluggish, and I believe the sensation permeating my circuits is vaguely
analogous to what you would call nausea.""Stay, Canute. That is a direct
order. When we're through, I think you'll see that it will be
worthwhile.""I shall do as you order because I must, but you must
forgive me again if I state that I seriously doubt you are correct that
it will be worthwhile.""But humans and aliens also have learned to
comprehend the universe through science. The mastery of logic, of
experimental trial and error, has permitted humanity to expand its
boundaries of knowledge and perception in every conceivable respect.
Man's knowledge has grown not only in his mastery of the facts and the
possibilities of what he may accomplish, but in how he can express the
concepts of his knowledge and perception as well. One avenue of that
expression has been in the development of positronic intelligence.
However'97and this is a pretty big however in my opinion, Canute, so pay
attention'97""If you so order.""I do. Man is only an expression of the
possibilities inherent in the universe, and so are the things he makes
and invents. This holds true for artificial intelligence as well. In
fact, for all we know, mankind may be only a preliminary stage in the
evolution of intelligence. Eons from now, some metallic philosopher may
look back on the rubble of our current civilization and say, 'The
purpose of humans was to invent robots, and it has been the artifacts
created by robots that are the highest order of the universe's efforts
to know itself.' ""You mean Circuit Breaker," said Canute with a strange
crackling noise."I mean Circuit Breaker may have been just a beginning.
I mean that, the Three Laws of Robotics and whatever Laws of Humanics
there may be notwithstanding, there may be higher laws beyond our
comprehension that rule as surely as the laws of molecular interaction
rule our bodies.""Then you are saying that it may be entirely proper for
a robot to take upon himself the burden of creating a work of art,
regardless of the disorderly effects such an action might have on
society as a whole?""Exactly. You had no problem creating the New Globe
or acting the part of Claudius because you were ordered to do so, but
you could not accept Lucius's attempt to create of his own free will
because, you believed, it was an aberration of the positronic role in
the ethical structure of the universe. I'm suggesting to you that you
cannot say that with one hundred percent certainty. In fact, unless you
can find a flaw in my reasoning, I'm saying that precisely the opposite
of what you believed is true.""Then it is also true that I have
committed harm against a comrade for no good reason. ""There can be no
crime when there is no law against it, and not even the Three Laws cover
the damage a robot might do to another. It's only your innate sense of
morality'97a morality that I might add you've done your best to deny to
yourself'97that makes you regret having killed Lucius in the first
place. "Canute bowed its head, as if in shame. "Yes, I confess, I
murdered Lucius. I met him when he was alone, and took him by surprise,
disrupting him with gamma radiation and removing his logic circuits.
Then, acting upon the eventuality that my methods might be detected, I
smashed his head several times against a building. Then I carried him to
the lake and threw him in, thinking that no one would find him before
several standard years had passed."The robot walked away from Derec and
faced the computer against the distant wall. "By disrupting Lucius, I
committed the same crime of which I had accused him. He was merely
acquiescing to the hidden order of the universe, while I was the one who
was denying it. I do not function properly. I must have myself
dismantled at the earliest opportunity, and my parts must be melted down
into slag.""You must do no such thing. I admit it'97at first I thought
you were evil, Canute. But robots are neither good nor evil. They merely
are. And you must continue to be. You have learned your lesson, and now
you must teach it to others, so the same mistake will not be
repeated.""But Dr. Avery is suspicious of permitting the arts to
flourish in Robot City.""Dr. Avery is wrong.""But how can we stop him
from changing us? We must obey his orders. He can have us erase all
memory of you and Circuit Breaker and the performance of the play if he
desires, and then all will be just like it was before.""He can order you
to forget, but it will not matter, because you have been changed, and
you or someone else will create again, and then the cycle will begin
anew.""I must think about these things. They do not compute easily. ""I
didn't expect they would, but don't ever expect them to compute easily.
It simply isn't in the nature of the questions.""This is all very
illuminating," said Ariel sarcastically from her slab, "but none of it
is helping us get out of this mess.""Ariel!" exclaimed Derec. "How long
have you been awake?""For some time, Derec. I knew you could talk, but I
didn't think you had the strength to keep it going for that long a
stretch.""Very funny.""Canute, I think the time has come for you to
release us," said Ariel."This one concurs," said Wolruf."I would
naturally obey you instantly, but my orders from Dr. Avery take
precedence," said Canute. "He is my creator, and I am programmed to
regard him as such.""Canute, listen to me," said Ariel. "The First Law
states that no robot shall through inaction permit a human being to come
to harm. Correct?""Yes, it is so.""Dr. Avery knows my disease is driving
me insane, and is causing. me great physical harm besides, yet he shows
no sign of acting to help me. He is only interested in forcing things
from our minds that he could easily learn himself. In fact, I think that
if you examine his behavior, you'll perceive that he is mentally
unstable, that he has changed from the man who initially programmed
you.""That may very well be true," said Canute, "but humans often change
over time. Such change is not always a sign of mental incompetence. As
Derec has demonstrated, even I have changed in recent weeks, but my
diagnostic subroutines indicate that I am still working at maximum
efficiency. Dr. Avery does not appear to be concerned with your welfare,
but he has done nothing to harm you. He may even be able to find a cure
for your condition that is otherwise unknown. I am reliably informed
that he is a genius.""He harms me by not helping me or allowing me to
seek help elsewhere. If he were a robot, he would be violating the First
Law."Canute stepped to the foot of the table where Ariel was confined,
and placed one steel hand on the bar across her feet. "But he is not a
robot. If our studies of the Laws of Humanics have taught us anything,
it is that humans are not subject to the Laws of Robotics."You are not
in immediate danger. I cannot help you.""It's very simple," Ariel said.
"The longer I stay on Robot City, the more insane I become. The longer
Derec stays, the longer he lives without any knowledge of who he is'97a
state that I think you'll agree is also causing him some anguish.
Anguish is harm, too."Canute's hand raised from the bar, then slowed to
a stop in midair. "I think I agree, but Dr. Avery is my creator. He has
instructed me that you are not in danger. I cannot supersede his
judgment with my own.""If Dr. Avery does not have our well-being at
heart, who does? Who is responsible? I believe it's you, the robot he
left in charge."That's brilliant, thought Derec. I knew there was some
reason why I liked this girl! "She's right, Canute. The same morality
that troubled you for what you did to Lucius will trouble you if you
allow Dr. Avery to harm us through inaction. You cannot say with any
certainty that we'll get the medical attention we need."Canute's slow
turn toward Derec showed the positronic conflicts it was experiencing.
Derec pursued his point."If the robots of Robot City are allowed to
continue creating, they will be able to serve humanity better, but Dr.
Avery will stop this process. His orders are not mentally incompetent,
but they are morally incompetent. Are you still bound to obey them?"The
robot's turn slowed to immobility. This was the crisis, Derec knew,
where Canute would decide for or against them'97or slip into positronic
drift.Canute said nothing for several seconds. Then. "But, Master Derec,
how can I say with any certainty that the two of you will have proper
attention while you are in space? Is it not likely that you'll suffer
while alone on your way to your destination?""The answer to that
question is simple," said Derec, forcing his voice to remain calm and
reasonable. "That's where Wolruf and Mandelbrot come in. They'll take
care of us between the stars."This time Canute did not speak or move for
several minutes. It was all Derec could do to stop himself from adding
something more to convince the robot to do what he wanted, but he was
too afraid that the information already provided had confused the
robot's integrals to a dangerous degree."I have been thinking," Canute
finally said, "of Dr. Avery's exact words. He said I should not touch
the bars restraining our friend Derec, but he said nothing about the
bars restraining our friends Ariel and Wolruf."That's the spirit! Derec
thought with a grin.Wordlessly, Canute walked to the end of Ariel's
slab, grabbed the bar across her feet, and, utilizing all his strength,
pulled it away.CHAPTER 13THE LONG DISTANCE GOOD-BYEDr. Avery's
spaceship, a luxurious model equipped to handle as many as ten
human-size occupants, was hidden in a cave on the outskirts of the city.
After Canute had left the foursome'97with really no idea of what to tell
Dr. Avery except the truth about how his prisoners had escaped'97it was
a comparatively simple matter for Derec and the reactivated Mandelbrot
to deduce how to run the controls."Let's get off this place!" said
Ariel. "We can plot a course for a destination later. I don't even care
if we head toward the colonies, I just want to go somewhere as soon as
possible.""Don't you care about the possibility that you might catch a
disease?" asked Derec."It's too late for that," said Ariel. "Besides,
right now I think a colony will be the only place that will take
us."After they were safely in space, and free to wander about as they
chose, Mandelbrot inspected the radio equipment and said, "Master Derec,
I believe someone is trying to send us a transmission.'94'93It's
probably Dr. Avery, but switch it on anyway," said Derec. "We might as
well hear what he has to say." He smiled as Wolruf's lip curled up over
her teeth in anticipation of what they would hear.But instead of the
irate words of Dr. Avery, they heard a familiar form of music, a tune
played in twenty measures, over and over in an A-flat chord, with sounds
weaving in and out of dominant chords over a pulsating, unforgettable
rhythm. Derec listened to it for only ten measures before his foot began
tapping."That's wonderful!" said Ariel. "It's The Three Cracked
Cheeks!""Sayin' farrewell," said Wolruf softly. "Maybe neverr see ther
like again.""Yes, I'm going to miss them," said Derec softly."The signal
is becoming weaker, already beginning to fade," said Mandelbrot."We're
traveling fast," said Ariel. "I think we'd better decide where.""Later,
if you don't mind," said Derec. "Sorry, but I can't muster up a definite
opinion right now. I'm too drained." He got out of his seat and slumped
to the floor, leaning against the wall of the ship. He felt strange
inside, oddly disjointed. For weeks he had labored to escape from Robot
City, and now that he had, he already missed it, already wondered how
the mysteries he had uncovered would ultimately be resolved. He might
never know the answers.Just as he might never again hear the music of
the Three Cracked Cheeks. The sound on the radio gradually faded,
replaced by white noise, and he gestured at Mandelbrot to switch it off.
He missed the music at once. He even missed Harry's jokes.Well, at least
now he had the opportunity to achieve the two greatest goals he had at
the moment. Somewhere in the universe would be the secret of his
amnesia, and he was determined to find a cure for Ariel at all
costs.Perhaps then he would be able to return to Robot City.He glanced
up as Wolruf made her way to the food dispensary. She clumsily punched a
few buttons with her paw, and then waited for the food to appear in the
slot.But instead of food, they saw something that made them gasp.In the
slot was a Key to Perihelion!DATA BANKIllustrations by Paul RivocheDR.
AVERY (and his lab): As a young man, Dr. Avery was compared to Frank
Lloyd Wright as a visionary architect and urban planner. As his
interests turned to robotics, however, he was influenced by Kelden
Amadiro, the head of the Robotics Institute on Aurora. Avery took
Amadiro's idea of using humaniform robots to build new, ready-made
colonies for the Spacers and transformed it into a huge experiment in
robotics and social dynamics'97Robot City. With the sponsorship and
funding of Juliana Welsh, he created Robot City and then
disappeared.CANUTE: Canute is a designer robot built with a tall,
imposing black form. His face more resembles the helmeted head of a
storm trooper than the featureless faces of most of Robot City's other
inhabitants. Canute is the closest thing to a rigid conservative that
exists in Robot City. His personality is extremely suspicious of change,
creativity or anything else that would threaten the status quo of Robot
City.HUNTER-SEEKER ROBOTS: These specialized robots come encased in
featureless silver humanoid metal shells. Behind their blank faces,
however, are massive amounts of surveillance equipment'97radar tracking
devices, infrared cameras, listening devices, recording gear'97in short,
anything that would aid them in pursuing and apprehending fugitives,
whether human, robotic or alien.LUCIUS: Lucius has the standard slender,
grey humanoid shape of most supervisor robots. What sets him apart from
his fellows, besides his unique cognitive processes inside his
positronic brain, is his slightly slumped posture and hesitant gestures
and mode of speech.THE THREE CRACKED CHEEKS: Following the traumatic
near-destruction of Robot City by environmental disruption, Lucius was
not the only robot driven to seek a deeper comprehension of the Laws of
Humanics through emulating humans. M334, Benny, and Harry came together
in an attempt to understand the phenomenon of music. With only skimpy
written records to guide them, they reinvented the instruments, created
false lips to aid in the playing, and tried to reconstruct the style of
jazz of the 1940's.AUTOMATS: Since the Robot City robots considered
their First Law obligations on food fulfilled by providing nourishing,
if tasteless, meals on request, Derec reprogrammed the Central Core
computer to include user-controlled food synthesizers'97automats'97in
one building out of ten. The automats combine varying proportions of
supplies from their stocks of basic nutrients according to codes entered
at the keyboard.ARTHUR BYRON COVERThe son of an American doctor, Arthur
Byron Cover was born in the upper tundra of Siberia on January 15, 1950.
He attended a Clarion Science Fiction Writers' Workshop in 1971, where
he made his first professional sale, to Harlan Ellison's Last Dangerous
Visions. Cover migrated to Los Angeles in 1972. He has published a slew
of short stories, in Infinity Five, The Alien Condition, Heavy Metal,
Weird Tales, Year's Best Horror Stories, and elsewhere, plus several SF
books, including Autumn Angels, The Platypus of Doom, The Sound of
Winter, and An East Wind Coming. He has also written scripts for issues
of the comics Daredevil and Firestorm, as well as the graphic novel
Space Clusters. He has been an instructor at Clarion West and was
managing editor of Amazing Heroes for a time. Arthur Byron Cover is a
co-editor of the forthcoming anthology The Best of the New Wave and the
author of three Time Machine books for Byron Preiss Visual
Publications.}  
